--- Page 1 ---
International Military Operations in
the 21st Century
This book examines the challenges that military forces will face in multi­
national operations in the twenty- first century.
Expanding on Rupert Smith’s The Utility of Force, the volume assesses the
changing parameters within which force as a political instrument is ulti­
mately exercised. By analysing nine carefully selected mission types, the
volume presents a comprehensive analysis of key trends and trajectories.
Building upon this analysis, the contributors break the trends and para­
meters down into real and potential tasks and mission types in order to
identify concrete implications for military forces in future multinational
operations.
The context of military intervention in conflicts and crises around the
world is rapidly evolving. Western powers’ shrinking ability and desire to
intervene makes it pertinent to analyse how the cost of operations can be
reduced and how they can be executed more intelligently in the future.
New challenges to international military operations are emerging and this
book addresses these challenges by focusing on three key areas of change:
an increasingly urbanised world; the changing nature of missions; and the
commercial availability of new technologies. In answering these questions
and embracing some of the insights of the growing field of future studies,
the volume presents an innovative perspective on future international
military operations.
This book will be of much interest to students of international interven­
tion, military and strategic studies, war and conflict studies, security studies
and international relations in general.
Per M. Norheim- Martinsen is senior research fellow at the Institute for
Defence Studies in Oslo, Norway and author of The European Union and
Military Force (2013).
Tore Nyhamar is senior researcher at the Norwegian Defence Research
Establishment (FFI) and has a PhD in Political Science from the University
of Oslo.
--- Page 2 ---
Cass Military Studies
Intelligence Activities in Ancient Leaders in War
Rome West Point remembers the 1991
Trust in the gods, but verify Gulf War
Rose Mary Sheldon Edited by Frederick Kagan and
Christian Kubik
Clausewitz and African War
Politics and strategy in Liberia and Khedive Ismail’s Army
Somalia John Dunn
Isabelle Duyvesteyn
Yugoslav Military Industry
Strategy and Politics in the Middle
1918–1991
East, 1954–1960
Amadeo Watkins
Defending the northern tier
Michael Cohen
Corporal Hitler and the Great War
1914–1918
The Cuban Intervention in Angola,
The list regiment
1965–1991
John Williams
From Che Guevara to
Cuito Cuanavale
Rostóv in the Russian Civil War,
Edward George
1917–1920
The key to victory
Military Leadership in the British
Brian Murphy
Civil Wars, 1642–1651
‘The genius of this age’
Stanley Carpenter The Tet Effect, Intelligence and
the Public Perception of War
Israel’s Reprisal Policy, 1953–1956 Jake Blood
The dynamics of military retaliation
Ze’ev Drory The US Military Profession into the
21st Century
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the War, peace and politics
Second World War Edited by Sam C. Sarkesian and
Enver Redzic Robert E. Connor, Jr.
--- Page 3 ---
Civil–Military Relations in Europe Cultural Diversity in the Armed
Learning from crisis and Forces
institutional change An international comparison
Edited by Hans Born, Marina Caparini, Edited by Joseph Soeters and
Karl Haltiner and Jürgen Kuhlmann Jan van der Meulen
Railways and the Russo- Japanese
Strategic Culture and Ways of War
War
Lawrence Sondhaus
Transporting war
Felix Patrikeeff and Harold Shukman
Military Unionism in the Post Cold
War Era War and Media Operations
A future reality? The US military and the press from
Edited by Richard Bartle and Vietnam to Iraq
Lindy Heinecken Thomas Rid
Ancient China on Postmodern War
Warriors and Politicians
Enduring ideas from the Chinese
U.S. civil–military relations under
strategic tradition
stress
Thomas Kane
Charles A. Stevenson
Special Forces, Terrorism and
Military Honour and the Conduct Strategy
of War Warfare by other means
From Ancient Greece to Iraq Alasdair Finlan
Paul Robinson
Imperial Defence, 1856–1956
The old world order
Military Industry and Regional
Greg Kennedy
Defense Policy
India, Iraq and Israel
Civil–Military Cooperation in
Timothy D. Hoyt
Post- Conflict Operations
Emerging theory and practice
Managing Defence in a Democracy Christopher Ankersen
Edited by Laura R. Cleary and
Teri McConville Military Advising and Assistance
From mercenaries to privatization,
1815–2007
Gender and the Military
Donald Stoker
Women in the armed forces of
Western democracies
Private Military and Security
Helena Carreiras
Companies
Ethics, policies and civil–military
Social Sciences and the Military relations
An interdisciplinary overview Edited by Andrew Alexandra,
Edited by Giuseppe Caforio Deane- Peter Baker and Marina Caparini
--- Page 4 ---
Military Cooperation in Modern War and the Utility of Force
Multinational Peace Operations Challenges, methods and strategy
Managing cultural diversity and Edited by Jan Angstrom and
crisis response Isabelle Duyvesteyn
Edited by Joseph Soeters and
Philippe Manigart Democratic Citizenship and War
Edited by Yoav Peled,
The Military and Domestic Politics Noah Lewin- Epstein and Guy Mundlak
A concordance theory of
Military Integration after Civil Wars
civil–military relations
Multiethnic armies, identity and
Rebecca L. Schiff
post- conflict reconstruction
Florence Gaub
Conscription in the Napoleonic Era
A revolution in military affairs?
Military Ethics and Virtues
Edited by Donald Stoker,
An interdisciplinary approach for
Frederick C. Schneid and
the 21st century
Harold D. Blanton
Peter Olsthoorn
Modernity, the Media and the
The Counter- Insurgency Myth
Military
The British experience of irregular
The creation of national mythologies
warfare
on the Western Front 1914–1918
Andrew Mumford
John F. Williams
Europe, Strategy and Armed Forces
American Soldiers in Iraq
Towards military convergence
McSoldiers or innovative
Sven Biscop and Jo Coelmont
professionals?
Morten Ender Managing Diversity in the Military
The value of inclusion in a culture
Complex Peace Operations and
of uniformity
Civil–Military Relations
Edited by Daniel P. McDonald and
Winning the peace Kizzy M. Parks
Robert Egnell
The US Military
Strategy and the American War of A basic introduction
Independence Judith Hicks Stiehm
A global approach
Edited by Donald Stoker, Democratic Civil–Military Relations
Kenneth J. Hagan and Soldiering in 21st-century Europe
Michael T. McMaster Edited by Sabine Mannitz
Managing Military Organisations Contemporary Military Innovation
Theory and practice Between anticipation and adaptation
Edited by Joseph Soeters, Edited by Dmitry (Dima) Adamsky and
Paul C. van Fenema and Robert Beeres Kjell Inge Bjerga
--- Page 5 ---
Militarism and International Understanding Military Doctrine
Relations A multidisciplinary approach
Political economy, security and Harald Hoiback
theory
Edited by Anna Stavrianakis and Military Strategy as Public
Jan Selby Discourse
America’s war in Afghanistan
Qualitative Methods in Military Tadd Sholtis
Studies
Research experiences and challenges Military Intervention, Stabilisation
Edited by Helena Carreiras and and Peace
Celso Castro The search for stability
Christian Dennys
Educating America’s Military
Joan Johnson- Freese International Military Operations in
the 21st Century
Military Health Care Global trends and the future of
From pre- deployment to intervention
post- separation Edited by Per M. Norheim- Martinsen
Jomana Amara and Ann M. Hendricks and Tore Nyhamar
Contemporary Military Culture and
Strategic Studies
US and UK armed forces in the
21st century
Alastair Finlan
--- Page 7 ---
International Military
Operations in the 21st Century
Global trends and the future of
intervention
Edited by
Per M. Norheim- Martinsen
and Tore Nyhamar
--- Page 8 ---
First published 2015
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
52 Vanderbilt Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2015 selection and editorial material, Per M. Norheim- Martinsen
and Tore Nyhamar; individual chapters, the contributors
The right of the editors to be identified as the authors of the
editorial material, and of the authors for their individual chapters,
has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical,
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and
explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing- in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging- in-Publication Data
International military operations in the 21st century : global trends
and the future of intervention / edited by Per M. Norheim-
Martinsen and Tore Nyhamar.
pages cm. – (Cass military studies)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Combined operations (Military science)–Forecasting.
2. Multinational armed forces–Forecasting. 3. Intervention
(International law) 4. War–Forecasting. 5. Twenty-first century–
Forecasts. I. Norheim-Martinsen, Per M., editor of compilation.
II. Nyhamar, Tore, editor of compilation.
U260.I54 2015
355.4'6–dc23 2014033645
ISBN: 978-1-138-81915-3 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-74477-3 (ebk)
Typeset in Baskerville
by Wearset Ltd, Boldon, Tyne and Wear
--- Page 9 ---
Contents
Notes on contributors xi
Preface and acknowledgements xiii
List of abbreviations xv
1 Introduction: trends and scenarios in international military
operations 1
PER M. NORHEIM- MARTINSEN
2 Five parameters for analysing international military
operations 21
TORE NYHAMAR
3 Future high-intensity conflict out of area: a possible NATO
counter- regime operation in Africa 39
SVERRE DIESEN
4 Counterinsurgency operations revisited 59
ROBERT EGNELL AND DAVID H. UCKO
5 Military advising and assistance operations 81
GURO LIEN
6 Special operations forces – a weapon of choice for future
operations? 97
IVER JOHANSEN
7 The future of UN peacekeeping operations 116
STIAN KJEKSRUD
8 The new urban operations 137
PER M. NORHEIM- MARTINSEN
--- Page 10 ---
x Contents
9 Transnational operations 155
TORE NYHAMAR
10 Cyber operations 174
SIW TYNES JOHNSEN
11 Protection of civilians as a new objective in military
operations 195
ALEXANDER WILLIAM BEADLE
12 Conclusions: new missions, new tasks 215
TORE NYHAMAR AND PER M. NORHEIM- MARTINSEN
Index 232
--- Page 11 ---
Contributors
Alexander William Beadle has been a research fellow at the Norwegian
Defence Research Establishment (FFI) since 2011. He received his BA
in War Studies and MA in Conflict, Security and Development from
King’s College London. His research has primarily focused on violence
against civilians in contemporary conflicts, and he has developed plan­
ning guidance for the protection of civilians in military operations. He
is currently leading a project on future military operations for the Nor­
wegian Armed Forces.
Sverre Diesen is a retired general and has been a chief researcher at FFI
since 2012. He served in a number of staff and command appointments
in the Norwegian armed forces, becoming Chief of Defence 2005–2009.
He has published two books on strategy and the future development of
the Norwegian military, as well as a number of articles in military jour­
nals. He holds an MSc in civil engineering from The Norwegian Univer­
sity of Technology and Science.
Robert Egnell (PhD King’s College, London) is a Visiting Professor and
Director of Teaching with the Security Studies Program at Georgetown
University. He is currently on leave from a position as Associate Pro­
fessor at the Swedish National Defence College. He is co- author (with
David Ucko) of Counterinsurgency in Crisis: Britain and the Challenges
of Modern Warfare and author of Complex Peace Operations and Civil–
Military Relations: Winning the Peace (Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2009),
and Gender, Military Effectiveness and Organizational Change: The Swedish
Model (Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave 2014).
Iver Johansen has been a chief researcher at FFI since 1988. He holds a
degree in political science from the University of Oslo (1987). Between
2009 and 2012, he conducted research on land forces development and
long- term force planning for the Norwegian Army. He currently leads
research activities on the nature of special operations and on the future
development of Norway’s special operations forces.
--- Page 12 ---
xii Contributors
Siw Tynes Johnsen is a research fellow at FFI. She received her BA in Com­
parative Politics from the University of Bergen, and her MA in Inter­
national Relations from the University of Kent’s Brussels School of
International Studies. She worked as a media analyst in NATO Head­
quarters during Operation Unified Protector (Libya). Her current
research at FFI focuses on the role of the cyber domain in international
military operations.
Stian Kjeksrud is a senior researcher at FFI, a PhD candidate at the Univer­
sity of Oslo and currently affiliated with the University of Cape Town.
He is a former officer with experience from operations in Afghanistan,
Kosovo, Macedonia and Lebanon. His research is on contemporary
UN peacekeeping operations in Africa and the role of military force to
protect civilians, publishing ‘United Nations Stabilization Operations:
The DRC and Mali’ with Lotte Vermeij, in UN Peacekeeping Doctrine in the
Post- Brahimi Era (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Guro Lien has been working as a researcher at the Norwegian Defence
Research Institute since 2008. She has an MSc in Comparative Pol­
itics from the London School of Economics and Political Science. Her
research interests are within international operations, and in particular
security sector reform and military assistance. She has published a
number of reports, articles and a book chapter on these topics.
Per M. Norheim- Martinsen is a senior research fellow at the Institute for
Defence Studies in Oslo. He received his PhD in International Studies
from the University of Cambridge. He is a former officer, with experi­
ence from operations in Lebanon. He has published extensively on
European security and international military operations, including
The European Union and Military Force (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press, 2013). His current research focuses on the transformation of
European military forces.
Tore Nyhamar (PhD University of Oslo) has been a senior researcher at FFI
since 2001. He obtained his Doctorate from the Department for Polit­
ical Science at the University of Oslo, where he held various positions
from 1989 to 2000. He has been Director of research on FFI’s work on
international operations since 2008. His research focuses on counter­
insurgency, small states in international operations and military doctrines.
David H. Ucko (PhD King’s College, London) is an associate professor
at the College of International Security Affairs, National Defense Uni­
versity, and an adjunct fellow at the Department of War Studies, King’s
College London. He is co- author (with Robert Egnell) of Counterinsur­
gency in Crisis: Britain and the Challenges of Modern Warfare (New York:
Columbia University Press, 2013) and author of The New Counterinsur­
gency Era: Transforming the U.S. Military for Modern Wars (Washington DC:
Georgetown University Press, 2009).
--- Page 13 ---
Preface and acknowledgements
This book has been a long time in the making. But the result, we hope, is
a truly different perspective on international military operations in the
twenty- first century, one that will prove helpful to practitioners and
policymakers, and thought- provoking for anyone interested in issues of
international intervention today. The project began in 2011 when the
Challenges in Peace and Stabilisation Operations group at the FFI was
challenged to say something about what future international operations
might look like, as part of the institute’s support activities for the Norwe­
gian Armed Forces’ long- term defence planning. The group then con­
sisted (in alphabetical order) of Stian Kjeksrud, Anders Kjølberg, Per M.
Norheim- Martinsen, Tore Nyhamar and Jacob Aasland Ravndal. Actually,
the question we most often get is ‘where will our armed forces be engaged
next’. We do not particularly care for this question, as our research does
not tell us what future events have in store for Western decision- makers.
We had recognised even prior to our first brainstorming session that our
response would have to be something other than our best guess on where
Norway would engage next. Indeed, the resulting FFI- Report 2011/01697
Fremtidens internasjonale operasjoner [Future international operations] by
Norheim- Martinsen et al. explains why the question ‘where will be next’ is
misguided. The report was co- published with FFI- Report 2011/01667
Trender, scenarioer og sorte svaner – utfordringer for fremtidens landmakt
[Trends, Scenarios and Black Swans – Challenges for Future Land Power] by
Norheim- Martinsen, in which the methodology for the present volume
was first laid out.
The former report was presented at an FFI seminar in Oslo with Lt Gen
Robert Mood, who headed the United Nations Supervision Mission in
Syria (UNSMIS) in 2012, and Prime Minister Erna Solberg, then leader of
the Conservative Party, commenting. During the stimulating discussion,
Solberg observed: ‘I hear what the military is saying about what kind of
international operation we ought to engage in, but it is not easy to be a
politician, sometimes things just happen, and it is necessary to act.’ This is
the premise of the book in a nutshell. International military operations
are rarely the result of a neat planning process, where the capabilities we
--- Page 14 ---
xiv Preface and acknowledgements
want to send are the capabilities needed, the timeframe is ideal, and the
challenges what we thought they would be when the decision to deploy
was made. We cannot stress enough that this book is not an attempt to
predict what the future of international military operations will look like.
But we hold that the option of international use of force to confront
crimes against humanity and manage crises that threaten local, regional
and global security is one that will be, and should be, open in the future
also. This requires constant adaptation of national and international
military structures and capabilities to a changing conflict environment.
With this book we want to encourage foresight in planning by raising the
awareness, among practitioners, policymakers and students alike, of what
new challenges this changing conflict environment may pose in the
future.
The present volume builds and improves on the first report in two ways.
First, the number of mission types is expanded. Cyber operations, Special
Forces operations, United Nations (UN) operations and protection opera­
tions have been added. Second, it was possible to cover each mission in
depth, and further develop and utilise the conceptual framework. We were
so fortunate to be able to expand the team and include the expertise of
Alexander William Beadle, Gen (ret.) Sverre Diesen, Robert Egnell, Iver
Johansen, Siw Tynes Johnsen, Guro Lien and David Ucko. In addition to
being a pleasure to work with, they all contributed in so many ways
to making this book a truly joint effort. We also take the opportunity to
express our gratitude to Lene Ekhaugen, Lt Col Egil Daltveit, Anne Kjersti
Frøholm, Kirsten Gislesen, Anne Lise Hammer, Maj Tor- Erik Hanssen,
Torbjørn Kveberg, Lt Col Kjell Pedersen, Ragnhild Siedler, Henning
Søgaard, Anders S. Vaage and Lt Col Palle Ydstebø.
Thanks also to two anonymous referees who understood what we tried
to do and offered constructive advice to keep us on track. We appreciate
the unwavering support from FFI Head of the Analysis Division Espen
Skjelland throughout the process, and from Project Leader Frode Rutledal
for his patience at the end. Last but not least a heartfelt thanks to Tom
Major at the FFI. Without his timely intervention way beyond the call of
duty, the book may well have remained uncompleted.
Tore Nyhamar and Per M. Norheim- Martinsen
Oslo
--- Page 15 ---
Abbreviations
AMISOM African Union Mission in Somalia
AU African Union
BOPE Special Police Operations Battalion (Brazil)
CIA Central Intelligence Agency (United States)
COIN Counter- insurgency
DDOS Distributed Denial of Service
DPKO UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations
DRC Democratic Republic of Congo
ECOWAS Economic Community of Western African States
EU European Union
EW Electronic Warfare
FARC Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Columbia
FARDC Congolese Army
FIB Force Intervention Brigade
FFI Norwegian Defence Research Establishment
GSG 9 German Police Counterterrorist Unit
IC International Community
ICC International Criminal Court
ICRC International Committee of the Red Cross
IDF Israeli Defence Force
ISAF International Security Assistance Force
LRA Lord’s Resistance Army (Uganda and around)
MINUSMA UN Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
MINUSTAH UN Stabilisation Mission in Haiti
MONUSCO The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo
NTC National Transitional Council (Libya)
OUP Operation Unified Protector (NATO)
OMLT Operational Mentoring and Liaison Team
P–5 Permanent Five Members of the Security Council
PMC Private Military Company
R2P Responsibility to Protect
SACEUR Supreme Allied Commander Europe
--- Page 16 ---
xvi Abbreviations
SAS Special Air Service (British)
SOCOM United States Special Operations Command
SPLA Sudan People’s Liberation Army
UN United Nations
UNHCR UN High Commissioner for Refugees
UNISFA UN Interim Security force for Abyei
UNMISS UN Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
UNMIX Imaginary Peacekeeping Force
UNSC UN Security Council
UNSMIS UN Supervision Mission in Syria
UPP Pacification Police Units, Brazil
US United States
US CERT US Computer Emergency Response Team
USCYBERCOM US Cyber Command
--- Page 17 ---
1 Introduction
Trends and scenarios in
international military operations
Per M. Norheim- Martinsen
The context in which international military operations are carried out is
constantly changing, as is the nature of war itself. The purpose of this
book is nothing less than an attempt to understand how current trends,
and the trajectories they may take, will affect tomorrow’s military opera­
tions. We are fully aware of the pitfalls of trying to look into the future –
many are those who have failed to do so in the past. But we hold that by
thinking about the future we will be better prepared to deal with both the
expected and the unexpected.
The book is ultimately about finding the utility of force in a modern
world. The reference to General Sir Rupert Smith’s opus magnum from
2005 is, of course, no coincidence (Smith 2005). Regarded by many as the
‘most important book on war for over a century and a half ’ (Gow 2006,
p. 1152), Smith offers an insightful account of the changing nature of
military strategy, operations and tactics. But where Smith starts his analysis
by asking what our desired end for using force is, we ask how the para­
meters in which force as a political instrument is ultimately exercised will
affect its use in the future. In light of demographic and economic shifts,
how can operations be carried out cheaper or smarter? How will the fact
that half of the world’s population already lives in cities affect future oper­
ations? How will emerging powers like China, India, Brazil and Turkey
affect how future peacekeeping operations are carried out? What missions
must military forces expect to carry out in the future? And how will new
technologies affect future operations?
By addressing these questions, the individual chapters of the book aim
to break down general trends and trajectories into tasks and mission types
in order to identify concrete implications for military forces in tomorrow’s
international military operations. As such, the book has a more specific
aim than some of the excellent books on the market, including Smith’s,
which address the changing character of war from a more general per­
spective (Barnett 2004, Gray 2005, Haug and Maao 2011, Strachan and
Scheipers 2011). It also takes a more explicitly forward-l ooking perspective
than much of the recent literature on peace and stabilisation operations,
which is for the most part based on historical analysis of past and present
--- Page 18 ---
2 P. M. Norheim-Martinsen
operations (Daniel et al. 2008, Paris and Sisk 2009, Mayall and de Oliveira
2011). By embracing instead some of the insights of the growing field of
future studies, and merging them with traditional scenario thinking, the
individual authors of this book are able to offer fresh insights and perspec­
tives on some of the challenges that military forces may have to face in the
future.
This introductory chapter first discusses briefly some of the limits and
potentials of studying the future, and outlines the methodological basis
for the book. It explains the difference between forecast and foresight,
and points towards how future studies may complement long- term defence
planning. The chapter then offers an overview of key global trends and
trajectories, and outlines how they relate to future international military
operations. The analysis covers trends in areas like demographics, eco­
nomics, technology and geopolitics and leads into nine scenarios or
generic mission types, which are then analysed in each of the remaining
chapters of the book. A key objective of the volume has also been to come
up with a comprehensive set of generic parameters for analysing emerging
tasks and requirements arising from each mission type. These are set out
and discussed in Chapter 2.
Future studies and long- term defence planning
Coming from a research community intimately involved in defence plan­
ning on both the national and international (NATO) levels, we see the
need for a different approach to long- term defence planning than the tra­
ditional models applied today. Modern defence planning is usually based
on scenarios. They are, as such, studies of what are perceived to be likely
but unwanted future events, and ways of managing these events. However,
there is no guarantee that other events, which are not planned for, will
occur. In fact, unexpected events represent rather the rule than the excep­
tion, a fact of life that has earned future studies a rather dodgy reputation,
especially in academic circles. However, we hold that this understanding is
dated, and ultimately misses what future studies are really about.
Future studies are often criticised for trying to predict the future – and,
in the end, for usually getting it wrong. But the purpose of future studies
is not to predict. Rather, future studies are about improving our capacity
to manage the uncertainty that inevitably defines the future – it is about
thinking ‘outside the box’. To be able to say at some point down the line
that our analysis of the future corresponded with the actual events is not
really the key. The aim of future studies is to make sure that decision
makers and planners do not get locked in to rigid and/or faulty interpre­
tations of continuity and change, and therefore make rash decisions, or
hesitate to make decisions, when unexpected or expected events occur.
But, before moving on to discuss some of the limits and potentials of
future studies, it is necessary to clarify what we mean by ‘the future’.
--- Page 19 ---
Introduction: trends and scenarios 3
There is no set timeframe for the book, insofar as the time horizon for
the studies on which our analysis of global trends draw varies. For
example, in demographics, it is not unusual to have a 30–50-year-
perspective. In technology studies, it is typically less than 25 years. In
demographics, one is fairly certain how many people are born in a given
year, providing a relatively firm basis for predicting how the population
will develop in the future. In technology studies, the time horizon is
shorter because breakthroughs and rapid change lead to significantly
greater uncertainty. In any case, giving an exact date for how far into the
future one would wish to see may imply a degree of certainty that simply
does not exist and may thus be misleading.
Instead, it is more fruitful to contrast our perspective with the time-
frame and methodology of traditional long- term defence planning. The
book is intended to complement this process, which in most Western
states is carried out in four- year cycles leading up to major reviews. In our
experience, it is difficult to include upcoming needs for change in this
process, and this is a problem which is shared with colleagues in most
NATO countries. Some countries, such as Norway, have moved towards a
continuous demand- driven planning process, which takes place simultan­
eously with implementation, to counter this tendency. However, a problem
with this approach is that it tends to be too reactive and does not encour­
age a more fundamental analysis of continuity and change at regular inter­
vals (see Norheim- Martinsen et al. 2011). A key objective of future studies
is precisely to ‘look beyond the horizon’, and to illustrate to decision
makers how global trends and alternative scenarios may pose both
expected and unexpected challenges in a longer perspective. Accordingly,
the timeframe of the book stretches beyond – but does include – the
4–12-year- perspective adopted in long- term defence planning, but it takes
a different perspective and methodology in order to complement this
approach.
Looking into the crystal ball – limits and potentials of future
studies
As stated above, the purpose of future studies is not to try to predict the
future, but rather to improve our capacity to manage uncertainty. This is
also why contemporary future studies literature tends to prefer the term
‘foresight’ to ‘forecast’. However, despite the usual caveats included in the
forewords and introductions of the numerous trend reports, books and
future blurbs that are published each year, they cannot escape the criti­
cism that they more often than not fail to predict the intensity and direc­
tion even of trends that come across as fairly certain, or fail to predict the
important events that in hindsight come across as perfectly predictable
(see e.g. Gardner 2010). The latter are often referred to as ruptures, stra­
tegic surprises or shocks, or in more popular terms, ‘black swans’.
--- Page 20 ---
4 P. M. Norheim-Martinsen
In his 2007 international bestseller The Black Swan: The Impact of the
Highly Improbable, Nicholas Nassim Taleb claims that almost everything in
the world, from major scientific discoveries to historical events, or the dir­
ections our own lives take, are due to ‘black swans’ – rare, unexpected and
completely unpredictable events, which, nevertheless, come across as com­
pletely rational when seen in hindsight. He cites the development of the
Internet, the computer, World War I and the 11 September 2001 terrorist
attacks as examples of such events. Taleb’s key message is that even if we
are able to predict certain trends with some degree of probability, we
cannot predict the really important, but rare, events that will have the
greater impact on our lives. The fact that they are, indeed, rare is what
makes them fall outside the remits of human imagination – human psy­
chology is biased towards what is known to us. This does not imply that the
events themselves are rare, merely that we are unable to predict when,
where and how the next black swan will strike.1 Hence, having better or
more statistics does not necessarily improve our ability to predict the
future. Likewise, trends and projections are nothing more than future
expectations based on developments over time – or like driving by looking
in the rear- view mirror.
The black swan problem is an important corrective to a growing belief
that risk analysis and management may put us in a position to identify and
remove, or at the very least reduce, any threat. Over the latter years, there
has emerged a virtual industry dedicated to future studies, and risk ana­
lysis in particular. For example, the United Nations University Millennium
Project Handbook, which is updated regularly, describes more than 25 dif­
ferent future analysis methods (see Glenn and Gordon 2009). None of
them is able to offer certainty about the future. Yet all risk analysis is based
on calculations in which risk is a function of the probability that a threat
will occur, and the consequences of it occurring. A precondition for all
risk analysis, therefore, is that any event can be predicted with some
degree of precision. History tells us that is not the case. Rather, the
increased belief that risk can be managed, and the corresponding devel­
opment of new methods aimed at increasing the accuracy of future
studies, may quickly become a form of collective self- deception. The ques­
tion is then: why should this book concern itself with the future of inter­
national military operations?
First, although we cannot predict the future, it makes perfect sense to
anticipate that something is going to happen, and to try to limit the neg­
ative consequences of potential future threats. The paradox of military
power is that it is most effective when it is not used. Rather, it is the exist­
ence or threat of force, and the corresponding knowledge about the inev­
itable costs of going to war, that will ensure its effectiveness. We hold that
the option of international use of force to confront crimes against human­
ity and manage crises that threaten local, regional and global security is
one that will be, and should be, open in the future also. This requires
--- Page 21 ---
Introduction: trends and scenarios 5
constant adaptation of national and international military structures and
capabilities to a changing conflict environment. With this book we want to
encourage foresight in planning by raising the awareness, among practi­
tioners, policymakers and students alike, of what new challenges this
changing conflict environment may pose in the future.
Second, thinking actively about the future may feed into scenarios or
mission types other than those planned for today. Scenarios represent a
key tool for states and international security organisations to test and
prepare military structures and capabilities for the kind of tasks they are
likely to (have to) carry out. They make it possible to prioritise and make
decisions under conditions of uncertainty. However, it is important that
military planners, when they develop their scenarios, do not rule out the
kind of tasks and missions that at present come across as less likely. As
such, future studies and scenarios may mutually reinforce each other by
contributing towards robust structures and capabilities, while, at the same
time, ensuring that future studies are made relevant for long- term defence
planning. The identification and analysis of nine different mission types
against five generic parameters, which we argue in Chapter 2 will define
emerging tasks and requirements for future forces, is meant as a modest
first step in this regard.
Third, despite the usual criticism launched against future studies, that
they tend to get the future wrong, they also often get it right. Conservative
analyses of trends and trajectories within isolated areas, such as economics
or demographics, may, in fact, prepare the ground for good decisions, and
make sure that the proper precautions are taken. Black swans are admit­
tedly all about the major, course- changing events, but planning is also
about the small- to-medium events. It is, for example, unwise not to start
revising expensive pension and welfare schemes when we expect that the
proportion of older people in society will rise. Trends analyses may
counter tendencies towards near- sightedness in defence planning by
showing how even conservative prognoses may incur completely new
security challenges over time. By actively exploring how major global
trends, which are not at the outset connected to security and defence, may
affect the use of international military force in the future, we want to con­
tribute towards countering such tendencies.
Finally, future studies and trends analyses are a constant reminder that
the world is changing. Such activities stimulate alternative thinking and
contribute towards avoiding so- called ‘cognitive closure’ – i.e. human
desire to eliminate ambiguity and arrive at definite conclusions. In our
search for certainty, we tend to stick with what we know, or what has
already happened (see e.g. Webster and Kruglanski 1997).2 It is, for
example, an historical fact that armies prepare for the last war. Or in the
famous words of Sir Basil Liddell- Hart: ‘The only thing harder than
getting a new idea into the military mind is to get an old one out’.
Studying the future contributes in itself towards nurturing a collective
--- Page 22 ---
6 P. M. Norheim-Martinsen
awareness that unexpected events will occur. By not thinking about the
future we succumb to the false idea that the world remains the same.
To sum up, the purpose of the book is not to predict but to provide
foresight, as opposed to forecast. Accordingly, we make no attempt to
predict what trends or mission types are most likely in the future, nor
assign probabilities to the mission types. In this sense our approach differs
from, for example, the Correlates of War project (see www.correlatesofwar.
org/) or any other approaches aiming to improve statistical predictions
regarding the likelihood of war (see e.g. Hegre et al. 2013). Instead, fore­
sight handles uncertainty by spelling out a number of scenarios rather
than narrowing down to only those that are considered likely at present. It
is sufficient that a scenario is plausible. Also, the sample of scenarios or
mission types does not need to be exhaustive to provide foresight. It only
needs to find enough interesting new challenges to be helpful.
With this aim in mind, we arrived at the nine mission types analysed in
this book by considering two ways in which new challenges for the inter­
national use of military force might arise. The first is how present mission
types will evolve in a conflict environment shaped by global trends. The
second is how the global trends may give rise to completely new mission
types. We shall return to what the nine mission types are shortly, but only
after we outline what we expect to be key global trends and explain how
they may shape international military operations in the future.
Demographics of discord – the shrinking of the West
Changing demographics represents a first set of trends that directly or
indirectly will affect the conduct of international military operations in the
future. Some commentators have even begun to talk about a new ‘popula­
tion bomb’ (Goldstone 2010). The numbers speak for themselves.
Given expected growth rates, the world’s total population is expected
to stabilise at somewhere between 7.7 and 11.2 billion people by 2050
(United Nations Population Reference Bureau, www.prb.org/). But 90 per
cent of the population growth will take place outside the Western world.
Since 2007, more people have been dying than have been born in Europe.
Russia is losing some 0.5 per cent of its population every year. It has been
remarked that, pandemics apart, the Russian situation lacks historical
precedents (Howe and Jackson 2008, p. 7). In contrast, China’s popula­
tion is expected to grow to 1.4 billion but will be surpassed by India, whose
population will grow to 1.8 billion by 2050. The United States’ population
will grow to 400 million people, while the total population of the Western
world will be around one billion people. In 2050, this will make up only
one- tenth of the world’s total population, compared to just below one-
seventh today.
The consequences of this demographic shift are serious enough. But
the West’s relative decline is also reinforced by a second megatrend: a
--- Page 23 ---
Introduction: trends and scenarios 7
dramatic ageing of the population in this part of the world. At present, the
proportion of people over 60 years old in the United States (US), Canada
and the European Union (EU) is 15–22 per cent. But, as the post- war baby
boomers are nearing retirement and life expectancy increases, the propor­
tion of people over 60 will increase to 30 per cent. At the same time, the
number of people of working age will go down, due to declining birth
rates. In some countries, the consequences of these demographic shifts
will be harder felt than in others: South Korea will, despite an expected
total population loss of only 9 per cent (from 48.3 to 44.1 million) by
2050, experience a 36 per cent decline of its working age population,
while its proportion of people over 60 will grow by 150 per cent. As a
result, South Korea’s working age population will barely outnumber those
over 60 years old. Europe will lose some 24 per cent of its working age
population, while the proportion of those over 60 will increase by 47 per
cent. It is also worth remarking that China will be facing similar prospects
(from 12 per cent over 60 today to 30 per cent in 2050), which will, among
other factors, have severe consequences for its economic growth. India is
again the demographic winner but faces a redistribution problem, as the
majority of its population growth will take place in the rural, poor north
(US Government 2010, p. 15).
The ageing of the West is, in turn, reinforced by a third demographic
megatrend: roughly nine out of ten children under the age of 15 are
growing up in the developing world. On the one hand, this emerging
‘youth bulge’ may provide the basis for improved economic growth in
countries like Turkey, Iran, the Maghreb states (Morocco, Algeria and
Tunis), Colombia, Costa Rica, Chile, Vietnam, Indonesia and Malaysia (US
Government 2008, p. 22). On the other, it may lead to a wave of ‘angry
youth’ if state authorities fail to provide them with opportunities, includ­
ing education, jobs, income and the prospects of a worthy life. Of the
world’s total population growth towards 2050, 70 per cent will take place
in countries which are classified by the World Bank as low income coun­
tries (i.e. average income below US$3.855 in 2008), such as Afghanistan,
Pakistan, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Ethiopia, Nigeria and
Yemen (US Government 2008, p. 22; Goldstone 2010).
Finally, the world is urbanising at an unprecedented rate (UN-
HABITAT 2008, Goldstone 2010). Today, more than 50 per cent of the
world’s population is living in cities, a share that is expected to grow to 70
per cent by 2050. This trend is particularly strong in Asia and Africa, which
contain most of the world’s 19 megacities, i.e. cities with more than ten
million people. In sub- Saharan Africa, more than one billion people are
expected to live in cities (from a proportion of 35 per cent today to 67 per
cent in 2050). The total number of megacities in the world is expected to
increase to 25 as early as 2025, but only one of them (Paris) will be in the
Western world (US Government 2008, p. 23). From an economic point of
view, the concentration of people in urban centres is expected to have
--- Page 24 ---
8 P. M. Norheim-Martinsen
positive effects, insofar as roughly 65 per cent of all economic activity and
85 per cent of all innovation take place in cities (UN- HABITAT 2008). But
there is a risk that urbanisation will have a destabilising effect upon many
countries. The urbanising states in sub-S aharan Africa in particular are
characterised by fast growing cities, urban sprawl, the growth of slums and
massive inequalities between rich and poor. These environments are
prone to rising violence and crime. They are also identified by lack of
management and control, which, in turn, may open them up to radical
groups, terrorist networks and organised criminals gaining a foothold and
being able to operate unchecked (Kilcullen 2013).
All of the abovementioned demographic trends will give rise to new
challenges in and for international military operations. Ageing popula­
tions in the Western world will have consequences for recruitment to
national military forces. Western states already have difficulties sustaining
large military deployments overseas, due to shrinking armies and defence
budgets (see below). Moreover, shrinking youth rates may increase the
threshold for Western states to engage in military operations, given the
economic and human costs that the use of armed force inevitably carries.
Other states, especially in the Middle East and sub- Saharan Africa, which
will often have youth rates above 50 per cent, may, in turn, have a lower
threshold for engaging in armed conflict (US Government 2010, p. 15).
Among the top ten troop- contributing countries to UN peacekeeping
operations, there are no Western states. States like Bangladesh, Pakistan,
India, Nigeria, Egypt, Nepal and Jordan continue to bear the greatest
burden, while a state like China has become the largest troop contributor
among the permanent members of the UN Security Council and the four­
teenth largest contributor altogether. Emerging powers, such as Brazil, are
moving in to take the lead in new UN operations (see discussion below).
Many of the challenges already seen in today’s operations will be
exacerbated. Ethical dilemmas in dealing with child soldiers will continue
to pose a challenge to intervening forces, especially in countries in Africa
with extremely youthful populations. The dividing line between soldiers
and civilians will become ever more blurred, as operations move from
rural to urban conflict environments. The urbanisation trend of the last
20 years has made it increasingly harder to avoid military operations in
urban areas, such as in Beirut (1982), Los Angeles (1992), Mogadishu
(1993), Gaza (2009), Grozny (1995, 2000), Baghdad (2003) and Fallujah
(2004) (Vautravers 2010, p. 439). In the future, the danger of vulnerable
cities collapsing completely, or being subject to massive systemic break­
down, as a result of natural disasters, energy shortages, lack of law and
order etc. will have wide security and humanitarian consequences. The
need to be able to operate in urban environments will have vast implica­
tions for Western militaries when it comes to tactics, doctrine, equipment
and training. Tomorrow’s megacities may typically contain small pockets
of heavily armed opposing forces, lawless areas under the control of
--- Page 25 ---
Introduction: trends and scenarios 9
criminal gangs, but also areas with relative stability, often in the immediate
vicinity of each other. International forces may, therefore, have to carry
out tasks such as community policing and more demanding combat opera­
tions simultaneously and within the same theatre of operations. The UN
operation MINUSTAH (Mission des Notions Unies pour la Stabilisation en
Haiti) in Haiti showed how military forces might be a blunt yet effective
instrument for confronting excessive urban violence. Similar- type opera­
tions have been carried out in the favelas of Rio de Janeiro, which illus­
trates how emerging powers like Brazil, which has been lead nation for
MINUSTAH since 2004, are developing the type of experience and cap­
abilities needed in tomorrow’s urban military operations. This is covered
in depth by Per M. Norheim- Martinsen in Chapter 7 of the book.
Finally, as a result of urbanisation, most refugees come from cities, and
therefore seek out other cities for protection. Protection of civilians is a
main objective in all UN peace operations today (see also below). The
challenges of protection in contemporary conflicts became all too appar­
ent in the 2010 international military campaign in Libya, in which the lim­
itations of air power were revealed as the warring parties retreated to the
cities. Protection of civilians in international military operations is covered
in depth by Alexander W. Beadle in Chapter 9.
Economic trends – spending smarter or going out of
business
Economic developments are closely connected to the demographic trends
above. Here too the main trend is a relative weakening of the West due to
lack of workers, fewer consumers and low expected economic growth in
the years to come. To put recent developments in perspective: in the
period after the industrial revolution, the US, Canada and Europe
increased their share of global GDP from 32 per cent in 1900 to 68 per
cent in 1950. Between 1950 and 2003, this share fell to 47 per cent.
However, even with an expected economic growth rate equal to the period
between 1973 and 2003 (average 1.68 per cent for the United States,
Canada and Europe, and 2.47 per cent for the rest of the world), Western
states’ share of global GDP is expected to sink below 30 per cent by 2050 –
less than it was in 1820 (Goldstone 2010). Some 80 per cent of future eco­
nomic growth will take place outside the Western world. This will, in turn,
result in a massive transfer of markets to other regions, in which the
middle class population is booming. According to World Bank projections,
the middle class in these parts of the world will reach some 1.2 billion
people by 2030. This number is higher than the expected number of
people in Europe, Japan and the US put together (Goldstone 2010). The
trends inevitably point towards an already ongoing transfer of economic
power away from the Western world towards emerging powers, such as
Brazil, Russia, India and China (the so- called BRICs), but also towards
--- Page 26 ---
10 P. M. Norheim-Martinsen
states like Indonesia, Mexico and Turkey. Views differ as to the sustain-
ability of economic growth in the BRICs in particular – Russia, for
example, should perhaps rather be seen as a declining power. Economic
forecasts are, in any case, uncertain, and black swans will occur, as seen in
the ongoing global financial crisis.
However, the shape of things to come is already evident in massive cuts
in national defence budgets. For example, in its military strategy from
2011, the US Joint Chiefs of Staff regard US foreign debt levels to be a
significant threat to national security (US Government 2011). US foreign
debt already amounts to more than US$3.5 trillion. In the future, the US
will be spending more than 7 per cent of its GDP just to pay the interest
(US Government 2010, p. 21). In comparison, the US national defence
budget equalled only 4.7 per cent of its GDP in 2010. President Obama
has signalled that the US will have to cut defence expenditure by US$78
billion over the next couple of years, but others expect even tougher cuts
(see e.g. Mandelbaum 2010). This will inevitably lead to a change in prior­
ities regarding where, when and how the US will use military force in the
future. These changes can already be observed in a general shift of military
focus away from the relatively stable Europe towards the Asia–Pacific
region. However, future cuts will also affect what is often referred to as the
US’ ‘hidden export’, i.e. the securing of global trade and communication
routes – or the so-c alled global commons – and the peace and stability
ensured by the continuing US military presence in several regions and
conflict zones around the world (US Government 2010, p. 22).
In Europe, we may also observe a general trend towards a tightening of
defence budgets. Given the economic realities of the ongoing crisis of the
Eurozone, this trend will only grow stronger in the years to come (see US
Government 2008, p. 32). Yet it is worth noting the fact that together
European states still spend more than US$200 billion per year – more
than double the amount of China – and still have some two million sol­
diers on active duty (see International Institute for Strategic Studies 2008,
chapter 4).3 The problem is that only a limited share of these forces is
deployable internationally, while effective spending is hampered by
unnecessary (and necessary) duplication of capabilities. The solution, as
held by most security and defence policy analysts today, lies in more inte­
gration by way of ‘pooling and sharing’ of capabilities, and more role
specialisation amongst the European states. In light of the financial crisis
there seems to be a growing political momentum for more military collab­
oration, as reflected in the NATO initiative on ‘smart defence’ (see NATO
2010) and the EU’s Ghent framework for pooling and sharing of military
capabilities (Germany/Sweden 2010). However, as remarked by Tomas
Valasek (2011): ‘What makes obvious sense to experts and officials looks
very different to national defence ministers.’ Collaboration takes years to
yield rewards and may initially cost more than it saves, while also carrying
real political risks, insofar as opposition politicians and journalists will
--- Page 27 ---
Introduction: trends and scenarios 11
often accuse defence ministers of undermining national sovereignty.
Europe knows it will have to spend smarter, but it is a slow train coming.
Until the incentives become strong enough for policymakers to move
beyond the politically safer route of inaction, therefore, Western states will
have to explore other options that may save money in the short to medium
term. Privatisation is but one obvious solution in this regard. Private
Military Companies (PMCs) have previously played an important role in
the conflicts in the Balkans in the 1990s and in numerous civil wars and
armed conflicts in countries such as Liberia, Sierra Leone and the DRC.
The US- led intervention in Iraq in 2003 is often described as a break­
through for the ongoing privatisation of military services in Western states.
And the tendency is increasing, despite serious issues raised with regard
to, for example, what used to be Blackwater’s role and activities in Iraq
(see e.g. Avant 2004, 2005). This trend may, on the one hand, be reversed
given greater awareness of the ethical issues and command and control
challenges incurred by outsourcing military force. On the other hand, it
may also grow stronger with the increased pressure on national defence
budgets. Policymakers may, perhaps in international military operations in
particular, be tempted to let increased competition in a growing market­
place for military services push the costs of intervention down. By outsour­
cing tasks to PMCs, policymakers may also avoid the political costs of
having the nation’s young men and women return in body bags. Such use
of ‘foreign legionnaires’ or ‘colonial forces’ is, of course, a practice that
has been around in states like the UK, France and Spain for centuries.
Another option may be to rely more on smaller deployments, often
using Special Forces to carry out limited raids, or to make use of mentor­
ing and training of local forces to avoid having to bear the costs of deploy­
ing and sustaining large units in the field. NATO has highlighted the
increased use of ‘indigenous forces’ as a key component in its future inter­
national operations (NATO ACT 2009). It is held that having the host
nation carry out stabilisation may even increase the operational effect in
theatre, while avoiding the problem of mission creep. However, such oper­
ations necessarily involve large cadres of Western officers who have the
language and cultural skills to carry out mentoring and liaison tasks in
often extremely hostile environments. These and other challenges are dis­
cussed by Guro Lien in Chapter 5, while the increased use of Special
Forces as a key Western asset in international military operations is treated
in depth by Iver Johansen in Chapter 4.
Technological trends – back to basics
Most future studies hold that scientific and technological developments
will grow ever faster and spread to new areas. A halt in or reversal of
technological developments is not considered likely, even if there are
historical examples of technology and knowledge lost.4 Exactly what the
--- Page 28 ---
12 P. M. Norheim-Martinsen
future will bring of technological innovation is impossible to anticipate,
but much is expected to happen in the areas of information technology,
nanotechnology and biotechnology. In addition, new fields of technology
may emerge. These developments will open up new opportunities for
growing numbers of people. But they will also lead to new challenges.
First, society today is becoming more reliant on information and commu­
nication technology, but the infrastructure for these technologies is vulner­
able. NATO’s strategic concept cites cyber attacks as a key threat against the
Alliance in the years to come (NATO 2010, para. 12). Second, increased
access to communication technology may destabilise countries, as seen, for
example, in the demonstrations that led to the downfall of the regimes in
Tunis and Egypt, in which mobile phones were used actively to spread
information amongst the demonstrators. The ongoing Arab Spring con­
tinues to demonstrate the difficulties totalitarian regimes face in trying to
control their populations in today’s information age. Third, increased aware­
ness of inequalities within and between countries and regions, as a result of
increased access to cheap communication technology, may lead to anger
and frustration amongst the have- nots. Fourth, new knowledge and techno­
logy may be utilised by potential adversaries, referred to below as terrorists,
to harm societies in ever new ways. The result of these developments may be
local and regional conflicts that may require international intervention. The
dynamics within these eventual operations may, in turn, change as the local
populations’ expectations of and attitude towards the intervening force will
be affected by greater awareness of the outside world, instant knowledge of
negative events on the ground, and the ability to mobilise and coordinate
large crowds of people as mobile phones and social media become effective
means of ‘command and control’.
Technology and innovation have played a particularly important role
for the military. In his essay ‘The Forgotten Dimensions of Strategy’, Sir
Michael Howard shows how technological superiority has had a decisive
effect upon the outcome on almost every war in (modern) history
(Howard 1983, p. 104). Yet Howard cautions against forgetting the social,
logistical and operational dimensions of strategy. Throughout military
history, the importance placed on technological and human factors has
tended to shift as technological innovations have been met with effective
counter measures. However, a brief look at the last 20 years shows that the
faith in advanced technology as the solution to all challenges of war has
gained an increasingly dominant role, as epitomised by the so-c alled
‘Revolution in Military Affairs’ (RMA). This is again changing.
In the US, the technological dimension is now being toned down (see
e.g. Department of the Army 2009). That is, the continued emphasis on
and investments in technology will not go away, but it will not necessarily
claim as central a role as it has in the past. These developments will have
to be seen in conjunction with the economic challenges discussed above.
For example, in the US there have been cuts in the F- 35 joint strike fighter
--- Page 29 ---
Introduction: trends and scenarios 13
programme, while prestige projects such as the Future Combat System
have been cancelled. The shift of focus is evident in the US Army’s cap­
stone doctrine from 2009, which states that RMA proponents have dis­
regarded many of the universal characteristics of war, while at the same
time putting too much emphasis on new technologies and capabilities. It
is held that concepts emphasising long- range precision- guided weapons in
particular have disregarded war’s political, cultural and psychological
context (Department of the Army 2009, p. 6). The resonance with
Howard’s 20-year- old warning is obvious.
Whether the emphasis will move back to technology in the future is
impossible to say. However, it is worth reflecting on the fact that future
technological innovation may not necessarily take place inside the Western
defence industrial complex, which so far has given birth to innovations
such as the Global Positioning System (GPS), the Internet, etc. Major
innovations today are developed by civilian companies, such as Google
and Apple. These companies are still predominantly located in the
Western world, which continues to score higher on innovation indexes
than countries such as China and India. But the gap is expected to be
reduced over the next ten years, as these countries learn to utilise their
comparative advantage in new fields of technology (US Government 2008,
p. 13). In any case, in the years to come it is expected that the technolo­
gical superiority, which has benefitted Western military forces for decades,
will gradually wither, as ‘[f]uture adversaries will use commercial off- the-
shelf capabilities (to include information technology) to construct a well-
organised, dispersed force capable of complex operations’ (Department
of the Army 2009, p. 13). Understanding how people might use techno­
logy will be more important than the technology itself.
At the core of many of the emerging challenges described so far is the
simultaneous vulnerability that increased technological dependency
creates. This is a challenge for Western military forces in particular. Most
weapon systems today are to some degree reliant on network technology
and/or GPS. Neutralising these systems, for example through various
forms of jamming, will have major consequences for how Western forces
operate. The US Army’s Capstone Concept takes as a point of departure that,
in the future, US forces cannot expect to be able to operate with all
systems intact. Protection of one’s own, and the ability strike against an
opponent’s, networks and systems – i.e. cyber warfare – will, therefore,
grow in importance. This is reflected, for example, by NATO’s signalling
that a cyber attack may trigger a collective response under article five of
the North Atlantic Treaty (NATO 2010). Insofar as the frequency and
effects of cyber attacks increase significantly, or for example effective GPS
jammers become commercially available, it may trigger a trend towards
more robust, low- tech solutions. The growing importance of the cyber
domain for international military operations is covered in depth by Siw
Tynes Johnsen in Chapter 9.
--- Page 30 ---
14 P. M. Norheim-Martinsen
Finally, technological developments will affect how Western forces
operate on the battlefield whether at home or abroad. The pressure on
European forces in particular to transform and adapt to stay interoperable
with US forces will continue to set the agenda for some time to come. But,
in the long run, an evening out of the technological differences between
the current haves and the have-n ots may also have a democratising effect
on how multinational operations are carried out, as emerging actors are
challenging the traditional lead nations.
New conflicts, new actors, new missions
The trends discussed above will give rise to new types of conflict, new chal­
lenges and solutions within existing types of missions, and also completely
new types of missions and approaches, all as new state and non-s tate actors
are entering the scene. The Arab Spring illustrates, for example, how
technological developments, such as a world in which ‘everyone’ has
access to cheap information technology, fuel the disappointment young
people especially feel, as their expectations of democratic development
and increased living standards are not met – or are not met soon enough.
It is becoming increasingly difficult for even authoritarian regimes to
control their own citizens. Mobile phones as a tool for mass mobilisation
and instant spread of information have proved to be very effective
weapons. Moreover, increased awareness of inequalities within and
between countries and regions may also cause conflicts to spread, as seen
in waves of demonstrations in states that are subject to rapid development,
such as Turkey and Brazil.
Limited access to natural resources also carries a significant conflict
potential, not least in light of the economic and demographic trends
described above. Limited access to water in the Middle East and Africa
may spur new water wars. The consequence may be a demand for inter­
national action to alleviate humanitarian crises or intervene in conflicts in
operational environments that will offer severe logistical challenges for
international forces. Finally, competition for coal, steel and other miner­
als, on which industrialising states especially depend, may also lead to new
conflicts in the future.
In other words, there is little to suggest that the demand for inter­
national military operations will go down in the future, even if this
demand is not necessarily as hard felt among the states at the receiving
end of the interventions, nor among some of the emerging powers such as
China, India or Brazil. The key problem is rather to be found on the supply
side, as the capacity and will among the states that have traditionally cham­
pioned international interventions in the past is bound to wither. This is
not to say that one always has a choice of intervention, as is sometimes
implied by distinguishing between ‘wars of choice’ and ‘wars of necessity’.
Insofar as national interests in a globalising world will be increasingly
--- Page 31 ---
Introduction: trends and scenarios 15
threatened outside national borders, international military operations far
away from home may rather become ‘wars of necessity’ in the future. The
controversies surrounding these operations will, at the same time, increase
as their legitimacy comes under pressure, domestic debate grows and the
more altruistic motives behind these operations are toned down.
However, this development must be seen in relation to another trend,
which has partly moved in the opposite direction, and which follows much
in line with Sir Rupert Smith’s thoughts on war among the people. Pro­
tecting people regardless of nationality has over the last decade become a
key priority for and in operations across the entire conflict spectrum. In
light of previous failures, the UN in particular has made protection of
civilians a top priority in its peacekeeping operations today. The adoption
of the principle of the ‘Responsibility to Protect’ (R2P) represents the
latest attempt to address the issue of mass violence against civilians hap­
pening in the first place. However, as Alexander W. Beadle discusses in
Chapter 11, protecting civilians has also become an objective beyond the
moral imperative. Protecting people has become a military–strategic
necessity in most types of operations, including operations where it is not
the primary objective; this first and foremost derives from the changing
nature of contemporary conflict in which civilians are increasingly tar­
geted. Yet a key question is whether emerging powers, such as China,
Russia, India and Brazil, which have all grown critical of using armed force
in instances where regimes attack their own populations, will support
these types of counter- regime operations in the future. Such operations
have also posed a number of challenges to the intervening parties in the
recent past, which raises questions about their desirability with those who
have championed them in the UN, an issue that is discussed by General
(Ret.) Sverre Diesen in Chapter 3. As we shall see, counter- regime opera­
tions may still be hard to avoid.
In any case, a rather obvious consequence of the trends discussed in
this chapter is that, as a result of economic expansion and a general
transfer of power from the Western world to emerging powers to the
South and East, new actors will (have to) take on an expanding role in
and for international military operations in the time to come. As an
example of the inherent logic of these developments, take China’s current
role and interests in Africa: currently, China has more than 100,000 ‘set­
tlers’ in Angola – young, highly educated individuals, who have con­
tributed to rebuilding critical infrastructure, such as roads, and restarting
the economy after decades of civil war. Even if the image of China’s role
in Africa is complex – China’s interests in South Sudan are, for example,
seen as more controversial – the Chinese enjoy much legitimacy and
respect in many African countries. This presence leaves a very different
impression of China than the usual threat images painted in the West (see
e.g. Brautigam 2009). Nevertheless, there is little reason to doubt that
China will move to protect its interests if, for example, threatened by civil
--- Page 32 ---
16 P. M. Norheim-Martinsen
war. The international community will then have to decide whether an
eventual Chinese operation should be sanctioned by the UN, who would
lead it, whether to participate in the operation, etc. These questions will,
in turn, have wider consequences for the UN as the central sanctioning
authority in matters concerning war. China is already the largest troop
contributor to UN missions amongst the permanent members of the
Security Council, and is, therefore, an actor with which Western forces will
have to cooperate to stay relevant as global security providers in the future.
Generally, Western forces will have to prepare for more cooperation with
states like Brazil, India, Indonesia and others – with the operational and
cultural challenges this will pose.
These expected changes in global security provision must also be seen
in relation to the increased awareness of challenges to the so- called ‘global
commons’: the high seas, the atmosphere, outer space and cyberspace.
Western states, with the US at the forefront, have for long secured free
access to and passage through the commons through international
regimes with various degrees of formalisation, such as the Law of the Seas.
Whether these regimes will be respected by emerging powers remains an
open question, especially if they are seen to run counter to shifting
national interests. The US’ traditional dominance in the world is under
pressure, which may lead to more of an international division of labour
when it comes to keeping the commons open. The naval operations to
counter the threat of piracy in the Gulf of Aden represent but one
example of an international effort to secure free passage in one of the
commons. Similar types of international military operations may become
more common in the future. Such operations may involve ‘taking out’
hackers operating in states or cities with limited governmental control,
taking out servers, taking out pirate bases onshore, supporting other
states’ cyber warfare, etc. A common denominator for these operations is
that they will be limited in scope and duration. This will, in turn, increase
the demand for highly specialised assets capable of operating alongside
other states’ forces and/or units from other branches within and beyond
the military.
In sum, the trends described above may point towards more limited,
interest- based operations, following a period in which humanitarian oper­
ations – or at least an emphasis on humanitarian motives for intervention
– have been the norm. This may require some form of role specialisation
in and between those states that want to take part in these operations in
the future. Issues such as the legality and legitimacy of intervention are
also becoming more muddled, as seen for example in changes in the way
that consent is handled and mandates are given. These are issues that are,
in turn, complicated by the fact that many challenges – and thus solutions
– today are transnational. Economic shifts suggest that Western countries
have to find cheaper forms of intervention, such as Military Advising and
Assistance operations or privatising military tasks, a trend that has been
--- Page 33 ---
Introduction: trends and scenarios 17
coming for quite some time already. There is still the danger that the
global community will stumble into operations of the kind that they do
not want to carry out, typically involving state or nation building, tasks that
require enormous resources and not least time. The recurring question is
still how to devise appropriate exit strategies, not necessarily how to avoid
these operations. And then we have the new forms of conflict, or old con­
flicts in new guise, including tomorrow’s urban conflicts.
Nine mission types for twenty- first century international
intervention
In this book, we try to cover some of the emerging challenges drawn from
the analysis of key global trends and trajectories – and seek to identify the
utility of force in dealing with them – by analysing nine carefully selected
mission types, which we believe will be relevant for future international
military operations. We arrived at this selection by considering two ways
that new challenges for the international use of military force might arise.
The first is how present mission types will evolve in a conflict environment
shaped by global trends. The following belong in this category:
s  HIGH  INTENSITY OPERATIONS #HAPTER 
s  COUNTER  INSURGENCY OPERATIONS #HAPTER 
s  MILITARY ADVISING AND ASSISTANCE OPERATIONS #HAPTER 
s  SPECIAL FORCES OPERATIONS #HAPTER 
s  5. OPERATIONS #HAPTER  
The second way is how the global trends may give rise to completely new
mission types. The following belong in this category:
s  NEW URBAN OPERATIONS #HAPTER 
s  TRANSNATIONAL OPERATIONS #HAPTER 
s  CYBER OPERATIONS #HAPTER 
s  PROTECTION OF CIVILIANS IN OPERATIONS #HAPTER  
We could have chosen other mission types, or other ways of grouping
them. Some would, for example, question why we have chosen to
include a chapter on UN operations, which is not exactly a new type of
mission. But we would argue that the UN is such an important actor in
international military operations, and that it imposes such essential
boundaries on other actors’ behaviour in all international interventions,
that it deserves to be analysed as a mission type of its own. This is not
least because changes to the way the UN operates, and its role as the key
sanctioning authority in matters relating to war, will have huge implica­
tions for international interventions in the future. In fact, all of the first
five mission types analysed are partly about salvaging some of the
--- Page 34 ---
18 P. M. Norheim-Martinsen
hard- won lessons of previous operations, rather than succumbing to the
politically tempting, but arguably false, idea that they can be avoided in
the future. In the chapters on military advising and assistance and
special operations, we also explore the feasibility of carrying out these
operations more cheaply and efficiently in the future. Some of the
mission types include elements of nation building, which some might
argue deserved its own chapter. However, we have chosen to deal with
this challenge by looking at nation building as intrinsic to many of the
mission types and by drawing some general observations across the
mission types in the concluding chapter.
Others will miss chapters on, for example, anti- piracy operations and
littoral operations, which have received some attention lately (see e.g. Kil­
cullen 2013). However, we have deliberately avoided purely naval opera­
tions, retaining rather a focus on land operations. Littoral operations, in
turn, are touched upon in the chapter on the new urban operations, as
the trends towards littoralisation can be seen as more or less intrinsic to
urbanisation. Although other mission types may also be missed by some
readers, it is necessary to stress again that for foresight it is sufficient that a
scenario is plausible. The sample of scenarios or mission types does not
need to be exhaustive. It only needs to find sufficient interesting new chal­
lenges to be helpful. We believe that the nine mission types selected for
this volume fulfil that objective.
Finally, our instructions to each author were that they analyse their
mission type using five generic parameters, which are set out in Chapter 2,
while taking an explicitly forward- looking perspective. But, to encourage
originality and out- of-the- box thinking, we gave them some freedom as to
how to approach each mission type, and how to relate to the parameters
in their analysis. Accordingly, some of the chapters take a case study
approach, some use a more traditional scenario approach, while others
take a more general approach. The result, we believe, is a truly innovative
perspective on international military operations in the twenty- first century,
which will prove helpful to practitioners and policymakers, and thought
provoking for anyone interested in issues of international intervention
today.
Notes
1 The problem is far from new. Philosophers such as David Hume, John Stuart
Mill and Karl Popper in particular were all preoccupied with the problem of
induction in logical thinking – i.e. drawing general conclusions from the spe­
cific, and making future predictions based on the past.
2 Cognitive closure is a term borrowed from psychology, but it is often used to
explain why intelligence analysts and decision makers in general have difficulties
breaking out of established thought patterns.
3 According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI)
Military Expenditure Database, China spent US$99.8 billion on defence in 2009,
although the real number is probably higher.
--- Page 35 ---
Introduction: trends and scenarios 19
4 The Mayans performed brain surgery, and the early Middle Ages were recog­
nised by a generally lower level of development than previous times. A more
recent example can be found in Germany’s decision to abandon nuclear power
due to its potential negative consequences.
References
Avant, D. (2004). “The Privatization of Security and Change in the Control of
Force”. International Studies Perspectives 5(2), 153–157.
Avant, D. (2005). The Market for Force. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Barnett, T. P. M. (2004). The Pentagon’s New Map: War and Peace in the Twenty- First
Century. New York: Putnam.
Brautigam, D. (2009). The Dragon’s Gift: The Real Story of China in Africa. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Daniel, D. C. F., P. Taft and S. Wiharta, Eds. (2008). Peace Operations: Trends, Pro­
gress, and Prospects. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Department of the Army (2009). The Army Capstone Concept. Department of the
Army Headquarters, US Army Training and Doctrine Command, TRADOC Pam
525–3–0.
Gardner, D. (2010). Future Babble: Why Expert Predictions Are Next to Worthless, and
You Can Do Better. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart.
Germany/Sweden (2010). Pooling and sharing, German–Swedish initiative. Berlin and
Stockholm: Food for thought paper. 10 February.
Glenn, J. C. and T. J. Gordon, Eds. (2009). Futures Research Methodology Version 3.0.
Washington, DC: AC/UNU Millennium Project.
Goldstone, J. A. (2010). “The New Population Bomb”. Foreign Affairs 89(1), 31–43.
Gow, J. (2006). “The New Clausewitz? War, Force, Art and Utility – Rupert Smith
on 21st Century Strategy, Operations and Tactics in a Comprehensive Context”.
The Journal of Strategic Studies 29(6), 1151–1170.
Gray, C. (2005). Another Bloody Century: Future Warfare. London: Weidenfeld &
Nicolson.
Haug, K. E. and O. J. Maao, Eds. (2011). Conceptualising Modern War. London:
Hurst & Co.
Hegre, H., H. M. Nygård, H. Strand, H. Urdal and J. Karlsen (2013). “Predicting
Armed Conflict, 2010–2050”. International Studies Quarterly 55(2), 1–21.
Howard, M. (1983). “The Forgotten Dimensions of Strategy”. In The Causes of Wars.
M. Howard. London: Temple Smith, 101–115.
Howe, N. and R. Jackson (2008). The Graying of the Great Powers: Demography and
Geopolitics in the 21st Century. Washington, DC: The Center for Strategic Inter­
national Studies.
International Institute for Strategic Studies (2008). European Military Capabilities:
Building Armed Forces for Modern Operations. London: Institute for Strategic
Studies, Strategic Dossier.
Kilcullen, D. (2013). Out of the Mountains: The Coming Age of the Urban Guerrilla. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Mandelbaum, M. (2010). The Frugal Superpower: America’s global leadership in a cash-
strapped era. New York: Public Affairs.
Mayall, J. and R. S. de Oliveira, Eds. (2011). The New Protectorates: International Tute­
lage and the Making of Liberal States. New York: Columbia University Press.
--- Page 36 ---
20 P. M. Norheim-Martinsen
NATO ACT (2009). Multiple Futures Projects – Navigating towards 2030 – Findings and
Recommendations. Norfolk Va: NATO Allied Command Transformation.
NATO (2010). Strategic Concept for the Defence and Security of the Members of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation. Adopted by the Heads of State and Government,
Lisbon, 19 November.
Norheim- Martinsen, P. M., S. Glærum and H. Fridheim (2011). Planning for the
Future – A Norwegian Perspective. Report to NATO specialist meeting, SAS-0 88,
‘Long Range Forecasting of the Future Security Environment’, Stockholm,
11–12 April.
Paris, R. and T. D. S. Sisk, Eds. (2009). The Dilemmas of Statebuilding – Confronting
the Dilemmas of Postwar Peace Operations. London: Routledge.
Smith, R. (2005). The Utility of Force: the Art of War in the Modern World. London:
Penguin Books.
Strachan, H. and S. Scheipers, Eds. (2011). The Changing Character of War. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Taleb, N. N. (2007). The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable. London:
Penguin Books.
UN- HABITAT (2008). State of the World’s Cities 2008/2009: Harmonious Cities. New
York: United Nations Human Settlements Programme.
US Government (2008). Global Trends 2025: A Transformed World. Washington DC:
National Intelligence Council.
US Government (2010). The Joint Operating Environment. Norfolk, Va: United States
Joint Forces Command.
US Government (2011). The National Military Strategy of the United States of America.
Redefining America’s Military Leadership. Washington DC: US Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Valasek, T. (2011). Governments Need Incentives to Pool and Share Militaries. London:
Centre for European Reform.
Vautravers, A. (2010). “Military Operations in Urban Areas”. International Review of
the Red Cross 92(878), 437–452.
Webster, D. M. and A. W. Kruglanski (1997). “Cognitive and Social Consequences
of the Need for Cognitive Closure”. European Review of Social Psychology 8(1),
133–173.
--- Page 37 ---
Five parameters for analysing operations 37
References
Arreguin- Toft, Ivan (2006). How the Weak Win Wars: A Theory of Asymmetric Conflict.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Arreguin- Toft, Ivan (2007). “How to Lose a War on Terror: A Comparative Ana­
lysis of Counterinsurgency Success and Failure”. In Jan Angstrom and Isabelle
Duyvesteyn, Eds. Understanding Victory and Defeat in Contemporary War, London:
Routledge.
Bellamy, Alex J., Paul Williams and Stuart Griffin (2004). Understanding Peacekeep­
ing. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Boulden, Jane (2005). “Mandates Matter: An Exploration of Impartiality in United
Nations Operations”. Global Governance 11(2), 147–160.
Burleigh, Michael (2011). Moral Combat: A History of World War II. London: Harper
Press.
Doyle, Michael W. and Nicholas Sambanis (2006). Making War and Building Peace:
United Nations Peace Operations. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Edelstein, David M. (2010). “Foreign Militaries, Sustainable Institutions”. In
Roland Paris and Timothy D. Sisk, Eds. The Dilemmas of Statebuilding. New York:
Routledge.
Egnell, Robert (2011). “Lessons from Helmand, Afghanistan: What now for British
Counterinsurgency?” International Affairs 87, 297–315.
Eldridge, Erik B. and Andrew J. Neboshynsky (2008). Quantifying Human Terrain.
Monterey CA: Naval Postgraduate School.
Galula, David (1964) [2006]. Counterinsurgency Warfare: Theory and Practice. West-
port, Conn: Praeger Security International.
Gentile, Gian P. (2008). “Misreading the Surge Threatens U.S. Army’s Conven­
tional Capabilities”. World Politics Review, 2 March.
Heinecken, Lindy and Rialize Ferreira (2012). “Fighting for Peace”. African Security
Review 21(2), 20–35.
Huntington, Samuel P. (1957). The Soldier and the State: the Theory and Politics of
Civil–Military Relations. Cambridge, Mass: Belknap.
Johnstone, Ian (2011a). “Managing Consent in Contemporary Peacekeeping Oper­
ations”. International Peacekeeping 18(2), 168–182.
Johnstone, Ian, Ed. (2011b). Peacekeeping’s Transitional Moment. New York: Center
on International Cooperation.
Kipp, Jacob (2006). “The Human Terrain System: A CORDS for the 21st Century”.
Military Review (September–October).
Kuehl, Dale (2008). “Inside the Surge: 1–5 Cavalry in Ameriyah”. Small Wars
Journal. 29 October.
Marston, Daniel (2008). “British Operations in Helmand”. Small Wars Journal. 13
September.
Marten, Kimberly (2006). “Warlordism in Comparative Perspective”. International
Security 31(3), 41–73.
Marten, Kimberly (2011). “Warlords”. In Hew Strachan and Sibylle Scheipers, Eds.
The Changing Character of War. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nardulli, B., K. Pollack, T. Szayna and B. Watts (1999). “Coup-p roofing James T.
Quinlivan”. International Security 24(2), 131–165.
--- Page 38 ---
38 T. Nyhamar
Neitzel, Sönke and Harald Welzer (2012). Soldaten: On Fighting, Killing and Dying.
The Secret World War II Transcripts of German POWs. London: Simon Schuster.
New York University Center on International Cooperation, (2011). Annual Review
of Global Peace Operations, 2011. Boulder, Colo: Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Norheim- Martinsen, Per Martin and Jacob Aasland Ravndal (2011). “Towards
Intelligence- driven Peace Operations? The evolution of UN and EU Intelligence
Structures”. International Peacekeeping 18(4), 454–467.
Quinlivan, James T. (1995). “Force Requirements in Stability Operations”. Para­
meters 25, 59–69.
Quinlivan, James T. (2003). “Burden of Victory: The Painful Arithmetic of Stability
Operations”. Rand Review 27(2).
Ricks, Thomas E. (2009). The Gamble: General David Petraeus and the American
Military Adventure in Iraq. New York: Penguin Press.
Schadlow, Nadia and Richard A. Laquement (2009). “Winning Wars, Not Just Battles:
Expanding the Military Profession to Incorporate Stability Operations”. In
Suzanne C. Nielsen and Don M. Snider, Eds. American Civil–Military Relations: The
Soldier and the State in a New Era. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Sherman, Nancy (2010). The Untold War: Inside the Hearts, Minds, and Souls of Our
Soldiers. New York: W.W. Norton.
Simpson, Emile (2012). War from the Ground up: The Twenty- first-century Combat as
Politics. London: Hurst.
Smith, Rupert (2007). The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World. New
York: Knopf.
Thruelsen, Peter Dahl (2009). “The Comprehensive Approach in Helmand – From
a Military Perspective”. In Flemming Splidsboel Hansen, Ed. The Comprehensive
Approach: Challenges and Prospects. Copenhagen: Royal Danish Defence College
Publishing House.
UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations (2008). United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations: Principles and Guidelines (Capstone Doctrine). New York: United
Nations.
Waltz, Kenneth N. (1979). Theory of international politics. New York: McGraw- Hill.
Wilder, Andrew and Stuart Gordon (2009). “Money can’t buy America love”.
Foreign Policy, 1 December.
--- Page 39 ---
Future high-intensity conflict out of area 57
References
Cohen, Eliot A. (2001). “The Unequal Dialogue: the Theory and Reality of Civil–
Military Relations and the Use of Force”. In Peter D. Feaver and Richard H.
Kohn, Eds. Soldiers and Civilians: The Civil–Military Gap and American National
Security. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Cohen, Eliot A. (2002). Supreme Command. Soldiers, Statesmen and Leadership in
Wartime. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Huntington, Samuel P. (1957). The Soldier and the State: the Theory and Politics of
Civil–Military Relations. Cambridge, Mass: Belknap.
3CHADLOW   .ADIA  AND  2ICHARD  !  ,AQUEMENT     h7INNING  7ARS   .OT  *UST 
Battles: Expanding the Military Profession to Incorporate Stability Operations”. In
Suzanne C. Nielsen and Don M. Snider, Eds. American Civil–Military Relations. The
Soldier and the State in a New Era "ALTIMORE  -D *OHNS (OPKINS 5NIVERSITY 0RESS
Winther, Dace (2014). Regional Maintenance of Peace and Security under International
Law. New York: Routledge.
United Nations. (2000). Comprehensive Review of the Whole Question of Peacekeeping
Operations in All Their Aspects (The Brahimi Report). New York: United Nations.
Further Reading
Clausewitz, Carl Von (1832) [1984]. On War. Edited and translated by Michael
(OWARD AND 0ETER 0ARET 0RINCETON  .* 0RINCETON 5NIVERSITY 0RESS
Diesen, Sverre. (2013). “Towards an Affordable European Defence and Security
0OLICY   4HE  #ASE  FOR  %XTENSIVE  %UROPEAN  &ORCE  )NTEGRATIONv  )N  *ANNE  ( 
Matlary and Magnus Petterson, Eds. (2013). NATO’s European Allies. Military
Capability and Political Will. Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan.
*ANOWITZ  -ORRIS   The Professional Soldier: A Social and Political Portrait. New
York: Free Press of Glencoe.
-ATLARY   *ANNE  (  AND  -AGNUS  0ETTERSON   %DS     NATO’s European Allies.
Military Capability and Political Will. Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan.
NATO. (2012). Interoperability: Connecting NATO Forces. www.nato.int/cps/en/nato­
live/topics_84112.htm?
Smith, Rupert. (2005). The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World.
London, Penguin Books.
Østerud, Øyvind and Asle Toje. (2013). “Strategy and Risk Assessment in NATO”.
)N *ANNE ( -ATLARY AND -AGNUS 0ETTERSON  %DS   NATO’s European Allies.
Military Capability and Political Will. Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan.
--- Page 40 ---
78 R. Egnell and D. H. Ucko
References
Alderson, Alexander (2010). “The Army Brain”, RUSI Journal, 155(3).
Barry, Ben (2011). “Libya’s Lessons”, Survival, 53(5).
Beckett, Ian F.W. (2008). “The British Counterinsurgency Campaign in Dhofar
1965–1975”. In Daniel Marston and Carter Malkasian, Eds. Counterinsurgency in
Modern Warfare. Oxford: Osprey.
Berdal, Mats (2009). Building Peace After War. Abingdon, Va: Routledge for Inter­
national Institute for Strategic Studies.
Biddle, Stephen (2006). “Allies, Airpower, and Modern Warfare: The Afghan
Model in Afghanistan and Iraq”. International Security 30(3).
Blagden, David (2009). “Strategic Thinking for the Age of Austerity”. RUSI Journal
154(6).
British Army (2009). Vol. 1 Part 10: Counter Insurgency Operations. Army Code
71749. London: Ministry of Defence.
Buley, Benjamin (2007). The New American Way of War: Military Culture and the Polit­
ical Utility of Force. New York: Routledge.
Cassidy, Robert M. (2005). “The British Army and Counterinsurgency: the Salience
of Military Culture”. Military Review 85(3).
Cohen, Eliot, Conrad Crane, Jan Horvatch and John Nagl (2006). “Principles,
Imperatives, and Paradoxes of Counterinsurgency”. Military Review 86(2).
Cohen, Michael A. (2010). “The Myth of a Kinder, Gentler War”. World Policy
Journal 27(1).
Dixon, Paul (2009). “ ‘Hearts and Minds’? British Counter- insurgency from Malaya
to Iraq”. Journal of Strategic Studies 32(3).
Dunlap, Maj. Gen. Charles J., Jr (2006). “America’s Asymmetric Advantage”. Armed
Forces Journal, September 2006.
Echevarria, Antulio J. II (2004). Toward an American Way of War. Carlisle, Pa: Stra­
tegic Studies Institute, US Army War College.
Egnell, Robert (2013). “A Western Insurgency in Afghanistan”. Joint Forces Quarterly
70(3), 8–14.
French, David (2011). The British Way in Counter- insurgency 1945–1967. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Galula, David (1964). Counterinsurgency Warfare: Theory and Practice. Westport,
Conn: Praefer.
Gardiner, Ian (2006). In the Service of the Sultan. Barnsley, UK: Pen and Sword.
Gentile, Gian P. (2011). “COIN Is Dead: US Army Must Put Strategy Over Tactics”.
World Politics Review. www.worldpoliticsreview.com/articles/10731/coin- is-dead-
u-s- army-must- put-strategy- over-tactics.
Goulter, Christina Ellamy: The UK Air Power Contribution to Operation Unified Protector.
Draft paper in RAND study on Operation Unified Protector. Santa Monica, Calif.
Gumz, Jonathan E. (2009). “Reframing the Historical Problematic of Insurgency:
How the Professional Military Literature Created a New History and Missed the
Past”. Journal of Strategic Studies 32(4).
Howard, Michael (2007). “A Long War?”, Survival 48(4).
Kagan, Frederick W. (2006). Finding the Target: The Transformation of American
Military Policy. New York: Encounter Books.
Kilcullen, David (2009). The Accidental Guerilla: Fighting Small Wars in the Midst of a
Big One. New York: Oxford University Press.
--- Page 41 ---
Counter-insurgency operations revisited 79
Kiszely, John (2007). Post- modern Challenges for the Modern Warrior. Cranfield, UK:
Defence Academy.
Kitson, Frank (1977). Bunch of Five. London: Faber and Faber.
Kitson, Frank (1971). Low Intensity Operations: Subversion, Insurgency, Peace- keeping.
London: Frank Cass.
Luján, Fernando (2013). “Light Footprints: The Future of American Military Inter­
vention”. Voices from the Field, Center for a New American Security, March 2013.
Luttwak, Edward N. (2007). “Dead End: Counterinsurgency Warfare as Military
Malpractice”. Harpers Magazine, February 2007.
Mackinlay, John (1998). “War Lords”. RUSI Journal 143(2).
Marks, Thomas (2002). Colombian Army Adaptation to FARC. Carlisle, Pa: The Stra­
tegic Studies Institute. Marks, Thomas A. (2009). “Mao Tse- Tung and the Search
for 21st Century Counterinsurgency”. CTC Sentinel 2(10) (October), 17–20.
Mockaitis, Thomas R. (1995). British Counterinsurgency in the Post- imperial Era. Man­
chester, UK: Manchester University Press.
Nardulli, B., K. Pollack, T. Szayna and B. Watts (1999). “Coup-p roofing James T.
Quinlivan”. International Security 24(2), 131–165.
Quinlivan, James T. (1995). “Force Requirements in Stability Operations”. Para­
meters 25, 59–69.
Quinlivan, James T. (2003). “Burden of Victory: The Painful Arithmetic of Stability
Operations”. Rand Review 27(2).
Rigden, I. A. (2008). The British Approach to Counter-i nsurgency: Myths, Realities, and
Strategic Challenges. Available from: US Army War College.
Smith, Gen. Rupert (2005). The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World.
New York: Knopf.
Thompson, Robert (1966). Defeating Communist Insurgency: The Lessons Of Malaya
and Vietnam. New York: Praeger.
Ucko, David H. and Robert Egnell (2013). Counterinsurgency in Crisis: Britain and
the Challenges of Modern Warfare. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ucko, David H. (2013). “Beyond Clear- Hold-Build: Rethinking Local- Level Coun­
terinsurgency after Afghanistan”. Contemporary Security Policy 34(3).
UN Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit (Military Division) (2004). Operation Artemis:
the Lessons of the Interim Emergency Multinational Force. Available from: UN Depart­
ment for Peacekeeping Operations.
UN Security Council’s Group of Experts (2013). Final report of the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011) concerning Libya. Available from: UN
Security Council.
US Department of the Army and United States Marine Corps (2006). Counterinsur­
gency. Available from: US Department of the Army.
Weigley, Russell F. (1973). The American Way of War: A History of United States Military
Strategy and Policy. Bloomington, Ind: Indiana University Press.
Wilson, Gregory (2006). “Anatomy of a Successful COIN Operation: OEF-
Philippines and the Indirect Approach”. Military Review 86(6), 2–12.
Woodward, Susan L. (2007). “Do the Root Causes of Civil War Matter? On Using
Knowledge to Improve Peacebuilding Interventions”. Journal of Intervention and
Statebuilding 1(2).
--- Page 42 ---
Military advising and assistance operations 95
References
Berman, Sheri (2010). “From the Sun King to Karzai: Lessons for State Building in
Afghanistan”. Foreign Affairs. 8(2), 2–9.
Cooper, Helene and Sheryl Gay Stolberg (2010). “Obama Declares an End to
Combat Mission in Iraq”. New York Times online version, 31 August 2010. Retrieved
from www.nytimes.com/2010/09/01/world/01military.html?ref=world.
Dubik, James M. (2009). Building Security Forces and Ministerial Capacity. Iraq as a
Primer. Washington DC: Institute for the Study of War.
Durch, William J. and Madeleine L. England, Eds. (2010). Enhancing United Nations
Capacity to Support Post- Conflict Policing and Rule of Law. Washington DC: Stimson
Center Report No 63.
Giustozzi, Antonio (2008). “Shadow Ownership and SSR in Afghanistan”. In
Timothy Donais, Ed. Local Ownership and Security Sector Reform. Berlin: Geneva
Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces.
Gohel, Sajjan (2012). Afghanistan: Green- on-blue Attacks Show There’s no Easy Way Out.
CNN online 18.9.2012. http://edition.cnn.com/2012/09/18/opinion/opinion-
afghanistan-green- on-blue/index.html.
Haug, Jan Erik (2009). The Operational Mentoring and Liaison Team Program as a
Model for Assisting the Development of an Effective Afghan National Army. Fort Leaven-
worth, Kans: US Army Command and General Staff College.
Hodes, Cyrus and Mark Sedra (2007). “The Search for Security in Post- Taliban
Afghanistan. Chapter Five: Security Sector Reform”. The Adelphi Papers 47(391),
51–93.
Kelly, Terrence K., Nora Bensahel and Olga Oliker (2011). Security Force Assistance
in Afghanistan: Identifying Lessons for Future Efforts. RAND Corporation, Arroyo
Center. www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/MG1066.html.
Krahmann, Elke (2005). “Regulating Private Military Companies: What Role for
the EU?” Contemporary Security Policy 26(1), 103–125.
Krekvik, Ola (2011). “Forsvarets samvirke med afghanske styrker. Dilemmaer og
utfordringer”. [The Norwegian Armed Forces’ cooperation with Afghan Security
Forces.] Oslo Files on Defence and Security, December 2011. Oslo: The Norwegian
Institute for Defence Studies.
Lien, Guro 2014. “Militær rådgivning og assistanse.” [Military Advising and Assist­
ance.] In Tormod Heier, Anders Kjølberg og Carsten Rønnfeldt, Eds. Norge i
internasjonale operasjoner. Militærmakt mellom idealer og realpolitikk. [Norway in
International Operations. Military force between idealism and realism.] Chapter 17.
Oslo: Universitetsforlaget.
Luck, Edward C. (2006). UN Security Council. Practice and Promise. New York:
Routledge.
Martens, Kimberly (2012). Warlords. Strong- Arm Brokers in Weak States. New York:
Cornell University Press.
Miller, Paul D. (2013). Armed State Building. Confronting State Failure, 1898–2012.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
New York Times online (31 March 2004). Enraged Mob in Falluja Kills 4 American
Contractors. www.nytimes.com/2004/03/31/international/worldspecial/31CND­
IRAQ.html?pagewanted=all.
Nilsson, Claes and Kristina Zetterlund (2011). Arming the Peace. The Sensitive Busi­
ness of Capacity Building. Stockholm: Swedish Defence Research Agency, FOI-R –
3269–SE.
--- Page 43 ---
96 G. Lien
Norheim- Martinsen, Per Martin, Tore Nyhamar, Anders Kjølberg, Stian Kjeksrud
and Jacob Aasland Ravndal (2011). Fremtidens internasjonale operasjoner. [The
Future of International Operations.] FFI report 2011/01697. Kjeller: Norwegian
Defence Research Establishment.
Ramsey, Robert D. III (2006a). Advising Indigenous Forces: American Advisors in Korea,
Vietnam, and El Salvador. Fort Leavenworth, Kans: Combat Studies Institute
Press.
Ramsey, Robert D. III (2006b). Advice for Advisors: Suggestions and Observations from
Lawrence to the Present. Fort Leavenworth, Kans: Combat Studies Institute Press.
Singer, P. W. (2008). Corporate Warriors. The Rise of the Privatized Military Industry.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Smith, Rupert (2005). The Utility of Force. The Art of War in the Modern World.
London: Penguin Books.
Stoker, Donald (2008). Military Advising and Assistance. From Mercenaries to Privatiza­
tion, 1815–2007. New York: Routledge.
Tarp, Kristoffer N. and Frederik F. Rosén (2012). “Coaching and Mentoring for
Capacity Development. The Case of South Sudan”. African Security Review 21(1),
15–30.
US Army Field Manual 3–07.1. (2009). Security Force Assistance. Washington DC: US
Headquarters, Department of the Army. (Approved for public release).
West, Owen (2012). The Snake Eaters. An Unlikely Band of Brothers and the Battle for the
Soul of Iraq. New York: Free Press.
Younossi, Obaid, Peter Dahl Thruelsen, Jonathan Vaccaro, Jerry M. Solinger and
Brian Grady (2008). The Long March. Building an Afghan National Army. RAND
Corporation, National Defense Research Institute. www.rand.org/pubs/mono­
graphs/MG845.html.
--- Page 44 ---
114 I. Johansen
References
Adams, T. K. (1998). US Special Forces in Action. The Challenge of Unconventional
Warfare. London: Frank Cass.
Axe, D. (2013). “British and French Commandos Take Charge of Mali War”. Wired.
www.wired.com/dangerroom/2013/01/mali- commandos/.
Baumann, A. (2013). “Shifting Parameters of Military Crisis Management”. Inter­
national and Security Network. Swiss Federal Institute for Technology Zürich. www.isn.
ethz.ch/isn/Digital- Library/Articles/Special- Feature/Detail/?lng=en&id=16129
0&contextid774=161290&contextid775=161268&tabid=1454208072.
Blaber, P. (2008). The Mission, the Men and Me. Lessons From a Former Delta Force Com­
mander. New York: Berkley Caliber.
Cohen, E. A. (1978). Commandos and Politicians. Elite Military Units in Modern Demo­
cracies. Cambridge, Mass: Center for International Affairs, Harvard University.
Daily Mail (1999). “SAS Swoop on Serb Butcher’. Daily Mail 21 December. www.sas­
specialairservice.com/sas- kosovo-serbia.html.
Dorschner, J. (2013). “The era of the operator”. Jane’s Defence Weekly, 27 March.
Erlanger, S. (2013). “Grim Economics Shape France’s Military Spending”. New York
Times. 30 April. www.nytimes.com/2013/04/30/world/europe/grim-e conomics-
shape- frances-military- spending.html.
Feickert, A. and Livingstone, T. K. (2011). US Special Operations Forces (SOF ): Back­
ground and Issues for Congress. www.fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/RS21048.pdf.
Feickert, A. (2014). US Special Operations Forces (SOF ): Background and Issues for Con­
gress. Washington DC: Congressional Research Service, May 8, 2014.
Fry, R. (2012). “Survival of the fittest”. Prospect Magazine. www.prospectmagazine.
co.uk/magazine/special- forces-sas- future/.
Ignatius, D. (2013). “Drawing Down, But Still Projecting Power”. Washington Post.
www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/david-i gnatius-drawing-d own-but- still-
projecting- power/2013/03/29/591ebe30–9895–11e2–814b-063623d80a60_story.
html.
Johnson, M. (2006). “The Growing Relevance of Special Operations Forces in US
Military Strategy”. Comparative Strategy 25(4), 273–296.
Jones, S. G. (2012). The Future of Irregular Warfare. www.rand.org/content/dam/
rand/pubs/testimonies/2012/RAND_CT374.pdf.
Kibbe, J. D. (2004). “The Rise of the Shadow Warriors”. Foreign Affairs. March/
April, 102–115.
Kiras, J. D. (2006). Special Operations and Strategy. From World War II to the War on Ter­
rorism. London: Routledge.
Maxwell, D. S. (2013). “Partnership, Respect Guide US Military Role in Philip­
pines”. World Politics Review. www.worldpoliticsreview.com/articles/12685/
partnership- respect-guide- u-s- military-role- in-philippines.
McLeary, P. (2013). “Lawmakers Skeptical of Global Spec Ops Plan”. Defense News.
www.defensenews.com/article/20130810/DEFREG02/308100007/Lawmakers­
Skeptical-Global- Spec-Ops- Plan.
McRaven, W. H. (1996). Spec Ops. Case Studies in Special Operations Warfare: Theory
and Practice. New York: Ballantine Books.
NATO (2009). Allied Joint Doctrine for Special Operations.
Neillands, R. (1998). In the Combat Zone. Special Forces since 1945. New York: New
York University Press.
--- Page 45 ---
Special operations forces 115
O’Donnell, C. M. (2012). The Implications of Military Spending Cuts for NATO’s Largest
Members. Washington DC. www.brookings.edu/~/media/research/files/papers/
2012/7/military spending nato odonnell/military spending nato odonnell pdf.
Robertson, L. (2013). “The Future of US Special Operations Forces” in Council on
Foreign Relations Special Report No. 66. Washington, DC: Council on Foreign Rela­
tions.
Schroen, G. C. (2007). First In. An Insiders Account of How the CIA Spearheaded the
War on Terror in Afghanistan. New York: Ballantine Books.
Shah, A. (2013). “World Military Spending”. Global Issues. www.globalissues.org/
print/article/75#USMilitarySpending [Accessed 4 December 2013].
Smith, R. (2006). The Utility of Force. The Art of War in the Modern World. London:
Penguin Books.
Storr, J. (2009). The Human Face of War. London: Continuum.
Thomas, J. and Dougherty, C. (2013). Beyond the Ramparts: The Future of US Special
Operations Forces. www.csbaonline.org/publications/2013/05/beyond-t he-ramparts­
the-future- of-u- s-special- operations-forces/.
Tugwell, M. and Charters, D. (1984). “Special Operations and the Threats to
United States Interests in the 1980s”. In F. Barnett, H. Tovar and R. Schultz, Eds.
Special Operations in US Strategy. Washington DC: National Defense University
Press, 27–44.
Urban, M. (2012). “Inside Story of the UK’s Secret Mission to beat Gaddafi”. BBC
News Magazine. www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine- 16573516.
USDOD 2011. Joint Publication 3–05 Special Operations. Washington DC: Depart­
ment of Defense.
USSOCOM (2008). United States Special Operations Command History. www.fas.org/
irp/agency/dod/socom/.
Warner, L. A. (2013). “Capacity-B uilding Key to Africom’s Mission”. World Politics
Review. www.worldpoliticsreview.com/articles/12689/capacity- building-key- to­
africoms- mission.
Zaalberg, T. W. B. (2005). Soldiers and Civil Power : Supporting or Substituting Civil
Authorities in Peace Operation during the 1990s. University of Amsterdam. http://
dare.uva.nl/document/102314.
--- Page 46 ---
The future of UN peacekeeping operations 133
References
Beadle, Alexander William (2014). Protection of Civilians – Military Planning Scen­
arios and Implications. 2014/00519. Kjeller: Norwegian Defence Research Estab­
lishment.
Beadle, Alexander William and Stian Kjeksrud (2014). Military Planning and Assess­
ment Guide for the Protection of Civilians. Kjeller: Norwegian Defence Research
Establishment.
Carlsson, Ingvar, Sung- Joo Han and Rufus M. Kupolati (1999). Report of the Inde­
pendent Inquiry into the Actions of the United Nations during the 1994 Genocide in
Rwanda. New York: United Nations.
Center on International Cooperation (2012). Annual Review of Global Peace Opera­
tions 2012. New York: Center on International Cooperation.
Defence Web (2014). “First Dutch Troops Head for Mali”. April 16. www.
defenceweb.co.za/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=34411:first-
dutch-troops- head-for- mali&catid=56:diplomacy- a-peace&Itemid=111.
Eide, Espen Barth, Anja Therese Kaspersen, Randolph Kent and Karen von Hippel
(2005). Report on Integrated Missions, Practical Perspectives and Recommendations.
Independent Study for the Expanded UN ECHA Core Group. Oslo and London:
Norwegian Institute for International Affairs and King’s College.
Gowan, Richard (2008). “The Strategic Context: Peacekeeping in Crisis, 2006–08”.
International Peacekeeping 15(4), 453–469.
Gowan, Richard (2009). The Future of Peacekeeping Operations: Fighting Political Fatigue
and Overstretch. New York: Friedrich Ebert Stiftung.
Gowan, Richard (2012a). “The UN Mission in Syria: Heading for Heroic Failure?”
www.worldpoliticsreview.com/articles/11909/the-u -n-m ission-in- syria-heading­
for-heroic- failure.
Gowan, Richard (2012b). “The Case for Co- Operations in Crisis Management”.
European Council on Foreign Relations. http://ecfr.eu/page/-/ECFR59_
CRISIS_MANAGEMENT_BRIEF_AW.pdf.
Heinecken, Lendy and Rialize Ferreira (2012). “Fighting for Peace: The Experi­
ences of South African Military Personnel in Peace Operations in Africa (Part
II)”. African Security Review 21(2), 42.
Holt, Victoria K. and Tobias C. Berkman (2006). The Impossible Mandate?: Military
Preparedness, the Responsibility to Protect and Modern Peace Operations. Washington,
DC: The Henry L. Stimson Center.
Hultman, Lisa, Jacob Kathman and Megan Shannon (2013). “United Nations
Peacekeeping and Civilian Protection in Civil War”. American Journal of Political
Science 54(4), 875–891.
Human Rights Watch (2009). Soldiers Who Rape, Commanders Who Condone: Sexual
Violence and Military Reform in the Democratic Republic of Congo. New York: Human
Rights Watch.
Kjeksrud, Stian (2009). Matching Robust Ambitions with Robust Action in UN Peace
Operations – towards a Conceptual Overstretch? Kjeller: Norwegian Defence Research
Establishment.
Kjeksrud, Stian and Jacob Aasland Ravndal (2010). Protection of Civilians in Practice:
Emerging Lessons from the UN Mission in the DR Congo. Kjeller: Norwegian Defence
Research Establishment.
Norwegian Ministry of Defence (2009). Capable Force – Strategic Concept for the Norwe­
gian Armed Forces. Oslo: Norwegian Ministry of Defence.
--- Page 47 ---
134 S. Kjeksrud
Perry, Alex (2012). “Somalia’s Chance: Can a US- Backed African Force Bring Peace?”
Time. August 13. http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,
2121096,00.html.
Premium Times (2014). First EU Forces Deployed in Central African Republic. www.pre­
miumtimesng.com/news/foreign/158460-first- eu-forces- deployed-central­
african-republic.html.
Security Council Report (2014). South Sudan Briefing : What’s In Blue. www.whatsin­
blue.org/2014/05/south- sudan-briefing.php.
Smith, Rupert (2006). The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World.
London: Penguin Books.
Tardy, Thierry (2007). “The UN and the Use of Force: A Marriage Against Nature”.
Security Dialogue 38(1), 49–70 doi:10.1177/0967010607075972.
Tardy, Thierry (2011). “A Critique of Robust Peacekeeping in Contemporary
Peace Operations”. International Peacekeeping 18(2).
United Nations (1999). The Fall of Srebrenica: The Report of the Secretary-G eneral. New
York: United Nations.
United Nations (2000). Comprehensive Review of the Whole Question of Peacekeeping
Operations in All Their Aspects (The Brahimi Report). New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2001). Implementation of the Recommendations of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations and the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations. New
York: United Nations.
United Nations (2004). High Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change: A More
Secure World: Our Shared Responsibility. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2005). World Summit Outcome. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2006a). Peace Operations 2010 Reform Strategy. New York: United
Nations. www.un.org/Depts/dpko/dpko/po2010.pdf.
United Nations (2006b). Delivering as One: The Report of the Secretary-G eneral’s High-
Level Panel on System- Wide Coherence. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2006c). Joint Operations Centres and Joint Mission Analysis Centres.
New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2006d). Note of Guidance on Integrated Missions. New York: United
Nations.
United Nations (2006e). Integrated Missions Planning Process (IMPP) – Guidelines
Endorsed by the Secretary- General on 13 June 2006. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2007a). UN Transitional Strategy Guidance Note. New York: United
Nations.
United Nations (2007b). Comprehensive Review of the Strategic Military Cell. New York:
United Nations.
United Nations (2008a). Securing Peace and Development: The Role of the United Nations
in Supporting Security Sector Reform. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2008b). Report on the Comprehensive Analysis of the Office of Military
Affairs in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2008c). Capstone Doctrine. New York: United Nations. www.effec­
tivepeacekeeping.org/sites/effectivepeacekeeping.org/files/04/DPKO-D FS_
Capstone%20Document.pdf.
United Nations (2009a). Concept Note on Robust Peacekeeping. New York: United
Nations.
--- Page 48 ---
The future of UN peacekeeping operations 135
United Nations (2009b). Protection in Practice – Practical Protection Handbook for Peace­
keepers. New York: MONUC.
United Nations (2009c). A New Partnership Agenda: Charting a New Horizon for UN
Peacekeeping. UN DPKO and UN DFS. www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/docu­
ments/newhorizon.pdf.
United Nations (2010a). Policy – Civil–Military Coordination in UN Integrated Peace­
keeping Missions (UN- CIMIC). New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2010b). The New Horizon Initiative: Progress Report No. 1. New York:
United Nations.
United Nations (2010c). Guidelines – Joint Mission Analysis Centres (JMAC). New
York: United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Department of
Field Support.
United Nations (2010d). DPKO/DFS Operational Concept on the Protection of Civilians
in United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2010e). Addressing Conflict- Related Sexual Violence: An Analytical
Inventory of Peacekeeping Practice. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2011a). Draft Framework for Drafting Comprehensive Protection of Civil­
ians (POC) Strategies in UN Peacekeeping Operations. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2011b). The New Horizon Initiative: Progress Report No. 2. New York:
United Nations. www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/documents/newhorizon_update
02.pdf.
United Nations (2011c). S/RES/1996. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2011d). S/RES/1990. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2012a). S/RES/2043. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2012b). Ranking of Military and Police Contributions to UN Operations.
New York: United Nations. www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/contributors/2012/
july12_2.pdf.
United Nations (2013a). S/RES/2100. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2013b). S/RES/2098. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2014a). S/RES/2149. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2014b). Ranking of Military and Police Contributions – April 2014.
New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2014c). Financing Peacekeeping. United Nations Peacekeeping. www.
un.org/en/peacekeeping/operations/financing.shtml.
UN News Centre (2010). “UN Peacekeeping in Consolidation Phase, Says Top
Official”. www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=35558&Cr=le+roy&Cr1=.
United Nations News Centre (2013). “DR Congo: UN Peacekeeping on Offensive
after Defeat of M23, Says Senior UN Official”. December 11. www.un.org/apps/
news/story.asp?NewsID=46721#.Uz1yMVe5T5M.
UNMISS (2014). Conflict in South Sudan – A Human Rights Report. New York: United
Nations.
Further Reading
ISAF (2012). “About ISAF: Troop Numbers and Contributions”. www.isaf.nato.int/
troop- numbers-and- contributions/index.php.
United Nations (2008). S/RES/1856. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2013). S/2013/110. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2014). Peacekeeping Fact Sheet April 2014. www.un.org/en/peace­
keeping/resources/statistics/factsheet.shtml.
United Nations Human Rights Council (2012). Report of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic. New York: United Nations.
--- Page 49 ---
152 P. M. Norheim-Martinsen
References
Balko, R. (2013). Rise of the Warrior Cop: The Militarization of America’s Police Forces.
New York: PublicAffairs.
Bertetto, J. A. (2013). “Counter- Gang Strategy: Adapted COIN in Policing Crimi­
nal Street Gangs”. Small Wars Journal, 9(11).
Braathen, E., Bartholl, T., Christovão, A. C. and Pinheiro, V. (2012). WP3 Settlement
Field Report: Rio de Janeiro. Oslo: Norwegian Institute for Urban and Regional
Research, NIBR.
Briscoe, I. (2013). Non- conventional Armed Violence and Non- state Actors: Challenges for
Mediation and Humanitarian Action. NOREF Report, May. Oslo: Norwegian Peace-
building Resource Centre.
Buss, T. F. (2008). Haiti in the Balance: Why Foreign Aid Has Failed and What We Can
Do About It. Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Chagas, C. V. B. (2010). “MINUSTAH and the Security Environment in Haiti:
Brazil and South American Cooperation in the Field”. International Peacekeeping
17(5), 711–722.
Delk, J. D. (2001). “The Los Angeles Riots of 1992”. In M. C. Desch, Ed. Soldiers in
Cities: Military Operations in Urban Terrain. Carlisle, Pa: The Strategic Studies Insti­
tute, US Army War College.
Diniz, E. (2007). “Brazil: Peacekeeping and the Evolution of Foreign Policy”. In
J. T. Fishel and A. Sáenz, Eds. Capacity Building for Peacekeeping: The Case of Haiti
Washington, DC: National Defense University Press, 91–111.
Dorn, A. W. (2009). “Intelligence- led Peacekeeping: The United Nations Stabiliza­
tion Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH, 2006–2007)”. International Peacekeeping 24(6),
805–835.
Dziedzic, M. and Perito, R. (2008). Haiti: Confronting the Gangs of Port-a u-Prince.
Special Report 208, September. Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace.
The Economist (2014). “Paramilitary Police: Cops or Soldiers?” 22 March.
Fishel, J. T. and Sáenz, A., Eds. (2007). Capacity Building for Peacekeeping: The Case of
Haiti. Washington, DC: National Defense University Press.
Goldstone, J. A. (2010). “The New Population Bomb”. Foreign Affairs 89(1), 31–43.
Graham, S. (2010). Cities under Siege: The New Military Urbanism. London: Verso.
Heine, J. and Thompson, A. S., Eds. (2011). Fixing Haiti: MINUSTAH and beyond.
New York: United Nations University Press.
Hirst, M. (2007). South American Intervention in Haiti. Comment, April. Madrid:
FRIDE.
Kenkel, K. M. (2010). “South America’s Emerging Power: Brazil as Peacekeeper”.
International Peacekeeping 17(5), 644–661.
Kilcullen, D. (2013). Out of the Mountains: The Coming Age of the Urban Guerrilla. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Kolbe, A. R. and Muggah, R. (2012). Haiti’s Urban Crime Wave? Results from Monthly
Household Surveys. Strategic Brief, March. Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Igarape.
Lieven, A. (2001). “Lessons of the War in Chchnya, 1994–1996”. In M. C. Desch,
Ed. Soldiers in Cities: Military Operations in Urban Terrain. Carlisle, Pa: The Stra­
tegic Studies Institute, US Army War College, 57–74.
--- Page 50 ---
The new urban operations 153
Mendelson Forman, J. (2011). “Latin American Peacekeeping: A new era of
regional cooperation”. In J. Heine and A. S. Thompson, Eds. Fixing Haiti:
MINUSTAH and beyond. New York: United Nations University Press.
Muggah, R. and Mulli, A. S. (2012). “Rio Tries Counterinsurgency”. Current History
111(742), 62–66.
Mulli, A. S. (2011). Patrolling Rio’s Favelas – From Pacification to Police State? Zurich:
ISN, Center for Security Studies.
Norheim- Martinsen, P. M. (2012). Brazil: An Emerging Peacekeeping Actor. NOREF
Report, November. Oslo: Norwegian Peacebuilding Resource Centre.
Norheim- Martinsen, P. M. (2013). The European Union and Military Force: Governance
and Strategy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Norheim- Martinsen, P. M. and Ravndal, J. A. (2011). “Towards Intelligence- Driven
Peace Operations? The Evolution of UN and EU Intelligence Structures”. Inter­
national Peacekeeping 18(4), 454–467.
Pace, M. and Luzincourt, K. (2009). “Haiti’s Fragile Peace: A Case Study of the
Cumulative Impacts of Peace Practice”. CDA Collaborative Learning Projects:
Reflecting on Peace Practice Project, Case Study Report, November 2009.
Shunk, D. (2014). “Mega Cities, Ungoverned Areas, and the Challenge of Urban
Combat Operations”. In 2030–2040 Small Wars Journal, 23 January (http://small­
warsjournal.com/jrnl/art/mega- cities-ungoverned- areas-and- the-challenge- of-
army- urban-combat- operations-in- 2030–2040).
Smith, R. (2005). The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World. London:
Penguin Books.
Tierney, J. (2012). “Peace Through the Metaphor of War: From Police Pacification
to Governance Transformation in Rio de Janeiro”. MA Master thesis, Massachu­
setts Institute of Technology, Boston.
UN- HABITAT. (2008). State of the World’s Cities 2008–2009: Harmonious Cities. New
York: United Nations Human Settlements Programme.
US Government. (2008). Global Trends 2025: A Transformed World. Washington DC:
National Intelligence Council.
Vautravers, A. (2010). “Military Operations in Urban Areas”. International Review of
the Red Cross 92(878), 437–452.
Weizman, E. (2006). “Lethal Theory”. LOG Magazine, April.
Zaverucha, J. (2000). “Fragile Democracy and the Militarization of Public Safety in
Brazil”. Latin American Perspectives, 27(3), 8–31.
--- Page 51 ---
Transnational operations 171
References
Adamson, Fiona B. (2013). “Mechanisms of Diaspora Mobilization and the Tran­
snationalization of Civil War”. In Jeffrey T. Checkel, Ed. Transnational Dynamics
of Civil War. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Austvoll, Martin “Transnational Ethnic Dimensions of Third- Party Interventions in
Civil Conflicts”. Master’s thesis, University of Oslo.
Bennett, Andrew (2013). “Causal Mechanisms and Typological Theory in the
Study of Civil Conflict”. In Jeffrey T. Checkel, Ed. Transnational Dynamics of Civil
War. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Buhaug, Halvard and Kristian Skrede Gleditsch (2008). “Contagion or Confusion?
Why Conflicts Cluster in Space”. International Studies Quarterly 52(2), 215–233.
Buhaug, Halvard, Lars- Erik Cederman and Jan Ketil Rød (2008). “Disaggregating
Ethno- nationalist Civil Wars: A Dyadic Test of Exclusion Theory”. International
Organization 62(3), 531–551.
Cederman, Lars- Erik, Luc Girardin and Kristian Skrede Gleditsch (2009). “Eth­
nonationalist Triads: Assessing the Influence of Kin Groups on Civil Wars”. World
Politics 61(03) 403–437.
Checkel, Jeffrey T. (2013a). Transnational Dynamics of Civil War. Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press.
Checkel, Jeffrey T. (2013b), “Transnational Dynamics of Civil War”. In Jeffrey T.
Checkel, Ed. Transnational Dynamics of Civil War. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press.
Fearon, James D. and David D. Laitin (2003). “Ethnicity, Insurgency and Civil
War”. American Political Science Review 97(1), 75–90.
Gill, Bates and Chin-H ao Huang (2013). “The People’s Republic of China”. In
Alex J. Bellamy and Paul D. Williams, Eds. Providing the Peacekeepers: The Politics,
Challenges and Future of United Nations Peacekeeping Contributions. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Giroux, Jennifer, David Lanz and Damiano Sguaitamatti (2010). “The Tormented
Triangle: The Regionalisation of Conflict in Sudan, Chad and the Central
African Republic”. Crisis States Research Centre working papers series 2, 47.
Crisis States Research Centre, London School of Economics and Political
Science, London.
Giustozzi, Antonio and Noor Ullah (2006). ‘Tribes’ and warlords in southern Afghani­
stan, 1980–2005. London: Crisis States Research Centre, London School of Eco­
nomics and Political Science.
Gleditsch, Kristian Skrede (2007). “Transnational Dimensions of Civil War”.
Journal of Peace Research 44(3), 293–309.
Hafvenstein, Joel (2007). Opium Season: A Year on the Afghan Frontier. Guilford
Conn: The Lyons Press.
Harpviken, K. B. 2010. “Troubled Regions and Failing States: Introduction”. In
Harpviken, K. B., Ed. Troubled Regions and Failing States: The Clustering and Conta­
gion of Armed Conflicts. Bingley, UK: Emerald.
Harpviken, Kristian Berg and Sarah Kenyon Lischer (2013). “Refugee Militancy in
Exile and upon return to Afghanistan and Rwanda”. In Jeffrey T. Checkel, Ed.
Transnational Dynamics of Civil War. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
--- Page 52 ---
172 T. Nyhamar
Hegre, Håvard, Tanja Ellingsen, Scott Gates and Nils Petter Gleditsch (2001).
“Toward a Democratic Civil Peace? Democracy, Political Change, and Civil War,
1816–1992”. American Political Science Review 95(1), 33–48.
Huntington, Samuel, P. (1968). Political Order in Changing Societies. New Haven,
Conn: Yale University Press.
Jackson, Robert H. and Carl G. Rosberg (1982). “Why Africa’s Weak States Persist:
The Empirical and the Juridical in Statehood”. World Politics 35(1) 1–24.
Kjeksrud, Stian and Jacob A. Ravndal (2011). “Emerging Lessons from the United
Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo: Military Contributions to
the Protection of Civilians”. African Security Review 20(2), 3–16.
Kjeksrud, Stian and Jacob Aasland Ravndal (2010). “Protection of Civilians in Practice
– Emerging Lessons from the UN Mission in the DR Congo”. Kjeller: Norwegian
Defence Research Establishment.
Long, Austin (2008). “The Anbar Awakening”. Survival 50, 67–94.
Marten, Kimberly (2006). “Warlordism in Comparative Perspective”. International
Security 31(3), 41–73.
Marten, Kimberly (2012). Warlords: Strong- Arm Brokers in Weak States. Ithaca and
London: Cornell University Press.
Martin, Guy (2013). “DRC Sniper Revelation Compromising SANDF Troops”.
Defence Web, 5 September.
MONUSCO (2014). Sensitations Mechanisms for Foreign Armed Groups. www.monusco.
unmissions.org/Default.aspx?tabid=10725&language=en- US
Nikitin, Alexander (2013). “The Russian Federation”. In Alex J. Bellamy and Paul
D. Williams, Eds. Providing Peacekeepers: The Politics, Challenges and Future of Un
Peacekeeping. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Norheim- Martinsen, Per Martin (2011). “Our work here is done: European Union
Peacekeeping in Africa”. African Security Review 20(2) 17–28.
Paul, Christopher, Colin P. Clarke and Beth Grill (2010), Victory has a thousand fathers:
Sources of Success in Counterinsurgency. Santa Monica, Calif: Rand Corporation.
Paul, Christopher, Colin P. Clarke and Beth Grill (2011). Victory Has a Thousand
Fathers: Evidence of Effective Approaches to Counterinsurgency, 1978–2008. Small Wars
Foundation, 13 January.
Prendergast, John (2013). “Daily Beast Op- ed: How Congo Defeated the M23
Rebels”. In Daily Beast: Enough! The project to end genocide and crimes against human­
ity. www.enoughproject.org
Rubin, B. R. (2006). “Central Asia and Central Africa: Transnational Wars and
Ethnic Conflicts”. Journal of Human Development 7, 5–22.
Salehyan, Idean (2009). Rebels Without Borders: Transnational Insurgencies in World
Politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Salehyan, Idean and Kristian Skrede Gleditsch (2006). “Refugees and the Spread
of Civil War”. International Organization 60(2), 335.
Salehyan, Idean, Kristian Skrede Gleditsch and David E. Cunningham (2011).
“Explaining External Support for Insurgent Groups”. International Organization
65(4), 709–744.
Simpson, Emile (2012). War from the Ground up: The twenty- first-century Combat as Pol­
itics. London: Hurst.
Smith, R. (2006). The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World. London:
Penguin Books.
--- Page 53 ---
Transnational operations 173
Stearns, Jason (2013). “As the M23 Nears Defeat, More Questions than Answers”.
In Jason Stearns, Ed. Congo Siasa. http://congosiasa.blogspot.co.uk/ 2013.
Tavares, Rodrigo (2008). “Understanding Regional Peace and Security: A Frame­
work for Analysis 1” Contemporary Politics 14(2) 107–127.
Tavares, Rodrigo (2009). Regional Security: The Capacity of International Organizations.
London and New York: Routledge.
Ulriksen, S. (2010). “Webs of War: Managing Regional Conflict Formation in West
and Central Africa”. In K. B. Harpviken, Ed. Troubled Regions and Failing States:
The Clustering and Contagion of Armed Conflicts. Bingley, UK: Emerald.
United Nations. (2013). S/RES/2098 www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.
asp?symbol=S/RES/2098(2013)
US Army Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute. “UN Force Intervention
Brigade against the M23”. In SOLLIMS – Stability Operations Lessons Learned
and Information Management System, 2013.
Zacher, Mark W. (2001). “The Territorial Integrity Norm: International Bound­
aries and the Use of Force”. International Organization 55(2), 215–250.
--- Page 54 ---
192 S. T. Johnsen
References
Arquilla, John and David Ronfeldt (1993). “Cyberwar is Coming!” Comparative
Strategy 12(2) Spring 1993, 141–165.
Campen, Alan D. (1992). First Information War: The Story of Communications, Com­
puters and Intelligence Systems in the Persian Gulf War. Fairfax, Va: AFCEA Inter­
national Press.
Clarke, Richard A. and Robert Knarke (2010). Cyber War: The Next Threat to National
Security and What to do About it. New York: Harper Collins.
Clemente, Dave (2013). Cyber Security and Global Interdependence: What Is Critical?
London: Chatham House, The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
CNN online (2011). Twitter is new battleground for NATO and Taliban in Afghanistan.
http://edition.cnn.com/2011/11/18/world/asia/afghanistan- twitter-war.
Diesen, Sverre (2013). “Cyber Operations – Game Changer or Supporting Activ­
ity?” Presentation at Norwegian Armed Forces Cyber Defence’s Cyber Confer­
ence, 18 April 2013.
DR online (2012). www.dr.dk/Nyheder/Indland/2012/06/04/204156.htm.
ENISA (2013). Mainstreaming European Military Cyber Defence Training and Exercises.
www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-a nd-CIIP/cyber-c risis-cooperation/
conference/2nd-enisa-c onference/presentations/wolfgang-r oehrig-eda-m ain
streaming-european.pdf.
Giles, Keir (2012). “Russia’s Public Stance on Cyberspace Issues”. In C. Czosseck,
R. Ottis and K. Ziolkowski, Eds. 4th International Conference on Cyber Conflict.
Tallinn: NATO CCD COE Publications.
Healey, Jason, Ed. (2013). A Fierce Domain: Conflict in Cyberspace 1986 to 2012. Wash­
ington DC: Atlantic Council and Cyber Conflict Studies Association.
Johnsen, Siw Tynes (2013). “Military Operations and the Cyber Domain”. Lecture
at the University of Oslo, 22 October 2013.
Kilcullen, David (2013). Out of the Mountains – The Coming Age of the Urban Guerilla.
London: Hurst and Company.
Kramer, Franklin D., Stuart H. Starr and Larry K. Wentz, Eds. (2009). Cyberpower
and National Security. Washington, DC: Center for Technology and National
Security Policy, National Defense University Press.
Morton, Chris (2013). “Olympic Games”. In Jason Healey (2013). A Fierce Domain:
Cyber Conflict 1986 to 2012. Washington DC: Atlantic Council and Cyber Conflict
Studies Association.
NATO (2006). Backgrounder: Interoperability for Joint Operations. www.nato.int/nato_
static/assets/pdf/pdf_publications/20120116_interoperability- en.pdf.
NATO (2009). Allied Joint Doctrine for Information Operations AJP- 3.10. http://info.
publicintelligence.net/NATO- IO.pdf.
NATO (2013). NATO and Cyber Defence. www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/topics_
78170.htm.
NATO Review (2013). The History of CyberAttacks – A Timeline. www.nato.int/docu/
review/2013/Cyber/timeline/EN/index.htm.
National Public Radio online (2013). Pentagon Goes on the Offensive against Cyber
Attacks. www.npr.org/2013/02/11/171677247/pentagon- goes-on- the-offensive-
against-cyber- attacks.
New York Times online (2011). US Debated Cyberwarfare in Attack Plan on Libya. www.
nytimes.com/2011/10/18/world/africa/cyber- warfare-against-l ibya-was­
debated-by- us.html?_r=0.
NRK online (2012). Afghanistan- styrkene hacket. www.nrk.no/verden/hacket-
forsvarets-afghanistan- nett-1.8178990.
--- Page 55 ---
Cyber operations 193
Reuters online (2012). www.reuters.com/article/2012/04/27/net- us-afghanistan-
taliban-hacking- idUSBRE83Q09I20120427 Reuters online (2013). www.reuters.
com/article/2013/02/23/net- us-hackers-v irus-china-m andiant-idUSBRE91
M02P20130223.
RIA Novosti online (2013). Russian Military Creating Cyber Warfare Branch. http://
en.ria.ru/military_news/20130820/182856856.html.
Rid, Thomas (2013). Cyber War Will Not Take Place. London: Hurst/Oxford Univer­
sity Press.
Schmidt, Andreas (2013). “The Estonian Cyberattacks”. In Jason Healey, Ed. A
Fierce Domain: Conflict in Cyberspace 1986 to 2012. Washington, DC: Atlantic
Council and Cyber Conflict Studies Association.
Schmitt, Michael N. (1999). “Computer Network Attack and the Use of Force in
International Law: Thoughts on a Normative Framework”. Columbia Journal of
Transnational Law Vol. 37, 1998–1999. SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1603800.
Schmitt, Michael N. (2011). “Cyber Operations and the Jus in Bello: Key Issues”.
Naval War College International Law Studies. SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=
1801176.
Smith, Rupert (2006). The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World.
London: Penguin Books.
Stars and Stripes (2009). Official: No Options ‘off the table’ for US Response to Cyber
Attacks. www.stripes.com/news/official-n o-options- off-the- table-for- u-s- response-
to- cyber-attacks- 1.91319#.UzqW2PmSxzg.
Thomas, Timothy L. (2009). “Nation- state Cyber Strategies: Examples from Russia
and China”. In Franklin D. Kramer, Stuart H. Starr and Larry K. Wentz, Eds.
Cyberpower and National Security. Washington, DC: Center for Technology and
National Security Policy, National Defense University Press.
United Nations (1945). Charter of the United Nations. www.un.org/en/documents/
charter/index.shtml.
United States Computer Emergency Response Team (2013). Understanding Denial-
of-Service Attacks. www.us- cert.gov/ncas/tips/ST04–015.
United States Department of Defense (2012). United States Joint Operational Access
Concept. www.defense.gov/pubs/pdfs/joac_jan%202012_signed.pdf.
United States Strategic Command (2013). Factsheet: Cyber Command. www.stratcom.
mil/factsheets/2/Cyber_Command.
Washington Post online (2011a). Operation Cupcake: MI6 Replaces al-Q aeda Bomb- making
Instructions with Cupcake Recipes. www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/blogpost/post/
operation- cupcake-mi6-replaces- al-qaeda-b omb-making-i nstructions-with- cupcake­
recipes/2011/06/03/AGFUP2HH_blog.html.
Washington Post online (2011b). US military, Taliban use Twitter to Wage War. http://
articles.washingtonpost.com/2011–12–18/world/35284991_1_isafmedia­
abalkhi-social- media.
Washington Post online (2013). US Spy Agencies Mounted 231 Offensive Cyber-o perations
in 2011, Documents Show. www.washingtonpost.com/world/national- security/us-
spy-agencies-m ounted-231-offensive- cyber-operations- in-2011-documents­
show/2013/08/30/d090a6ae-119e-11e3-b4cb-fd7ce041d814_print.html.
Waxman, Matthew C. (2011). “Cyber Attacks as ‘Force’ under UN Charter Article
2(4)”. In Raul A. “Pete” Pedrozo and Daria P. Wollschlaeger International Law
and the Changing Character of War. International Law Studies, Volume 87.
Windvik, Ronny and Sverre Diesen (2013). Cyber Power and the Role of the Armed
Forces. FFI- Forum, Oslo Militære Samfund, 26 November 2013.
--- Page 56 ---
212 A. W. Beadle
References
Army Times (2010). McChrystal: Civilian Deaths Endanger Mission, 30 May. www.army­
times.com/news/2010/05/military_afghanistan_civilian_casualties_053010w.
Beadle, Alexander William (2010). “Protection of Civilians in Theory: A Compari­
son of UN and NATO Approaches”. FFI- rapport 2010/02453. Kjeller: Norwegian
Defence Research Establishment (FFI).
Beadle, Alexander William (2011). “Finding the ‘Utility of Force to Protect’:
Towards a Theory on Protection of Civilians”. FFI- rapport 2011/01889. Kjeller:
Norwegian Defence Research Establishment (FFI).
Beadle, Alexander William (2014). “Protection of Civilians – Military Planning
Scenarios and Implications”. FFI-r apport 2014/00519. Kjeller: Norwegian Defence
Research Establishment (FFI).
Beadle, Alexander William and Kjeksrud, Stian (2014). “Military Planning and
Assessment Guide for the Protection of Civilians”. FFI-r apport 2014/00965.
Kjeller: Norwegian Defence Research Establishment (FFI).
Bukkvoll, Tor (2011). “Russian Arms Export to the Developing World’. FFI- rapport
2011/01918. Kjeller: Norwegian Defence Research Establishment (FFI).
Burke, Marshall B., Miguel, Edward, Satyanath, Shanker, Dykema, John A. and
Lobell, David B. (2009). “Warming Increases the Risk of Civil War in Africa”.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106(49),
20670–20674.
Christensen, Stian Nordengen (2011). “Approaching Counterfactuals in History,
with a Case Study of the Historiography of the War in Bosnia- Herzegovina in
1993”. Dissertation for Doctor of Philosophy Degree, University of Oslo.
CIA, The World Factbook. www.cia.gov/library/publications/the- world-factbook/
fields/2212.html#od, accessed 18 January 2013.
Counterinsurgency Field Manual 3–24, 2006. Boulder, Colo: Paladin Press.
Feil, Scott R. (1998). Preventing Genocide: How the Early Use of Force Might Have Suc­
ceeded in Rwanda. New York: Carnegie Corporation.
Ford Institute for Human Security (2009). Protecting Civilians: Key Determinants in
the Effectiveness of a Peacekeeping Force. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh.
Giffen, Alison (2010). Addressing the Doctrinal Deficit. Washington, DC: The Henry
L. Stimson Center.
Giffen, Alison (2011). “Enhancing the Protection of Civilians in Peace Operations:
From Policy to Practice. A background paper prepared for the Australian Govern­
ment’s Asia Pacific Civil–Military Centre of Excellence”. 24–26 May 2011. Available
at: http://civmilcoe.gov.au/wp- content/uploads/2011/10/Giffen- CMAC.pdf,
accessed 18 January 2013.
Global Centre for the Responsibility to Protect (2012). The Relationship between the
Responsibility to Protect and the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict. Policy Brief,
http://responsibilitytoprotect.org/The%20Relationship%20Between%20
R2P%20and%20POC%20in%20Armed%20Conflict%20Brief%2021%20
June%202012.pdf, accessed 18 January 2013.
Gow, James (1997). Triumph of the Lack of Will: International Diplomacy and the Yugo­
slav War. London: Hurst.
Gow, James (2006). “The new Clausewitz? War, Force, Art and Utility – Rupert
Smith on 21st Century Strategy, Operations and Tactics in a Comprehensive
Context”. Journal of Strategic Studies 29(6), 1151–1170.
Greenberg, S. B. and Boorstin, R. O. (2001). “People on War: Civilians in the Line
of Fire”. Public Perspective, November/December 2001.
Holt, V., Taylor, G. and Kelly, M. (2009). Protecting Civilians in the Context of UN
Peacekeeping Operations. New York: DPKO and OCHA.
--- Page 57 ---
Protection of civilians as a new objective 213
Human Rights Watch (2000). Civilian Deaths in the NATO Air Campaign 12(1). www.
hrw.org/reports/2000/nato/Natbm200–01.htm, accessed 18 January 2013.
Human Rights Watch (2001). Under Orders. www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/
reports/Under_Orders_En_Combined.pdf, accessed 18 January 2013.
Human Rights Watch (2012). Unacknowledged deaths. 14 May 2012. www.hrw.org/
node/107087/section/2, accessed 18 January 2013.
Iraq Body Count (2010). Iraq War Logs: What the numbers reveal, 23 October 2010.
www.iraqbodycount.org/analysis/numbers/warlogs/, accessed 18 January 2013.
ISAF Counterinsurgency Guidance, August 2009 Kabul: Headquarters ISAF.
Johnson, David E., Mueller, Karl P., Taft, William H. (2002). Conventional Coercion
Across the Spectrum of Operations: The Utility of US Military Forces in the Emerging
Security Environment. MR- 1494 (RAND Corporation). www.rand.org/pubs/mono­
graph_reports/MR1494.html
Kelly, Max (2010). Protecting Civilians: Proposed Principles for Military Operations Wash­
ington, DC: The Henry L. Stimson Center.
Kelly, Max and Giffen, Alison (2011). Military Planning to Protect Civilians: Proposed
Guidance for United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. Washington, DC: The Henry
L. Stimson Center.
Kemp, Richard (2011). “Col Richard Kemp’s Speech to ‘We Believe in Israel’ Con­
ference”. London, 15 May 2011. The Jewish Chronicle Online, www.thejc.com/
blogs/jonathan-h offman/col-r ichard-kemps-s peech-we-b elieve-israel-c onference­
london- 15-may.
Kjeksrud, Stian and Ravndal, Jacob Aasland (2010). “Protection of Civilians in
Practice: Lessons from the UN Mission in the DR Congo”. FFI- rapport 2010/02378
Kjeller: Norwegian Defence Research Establishment (FFI).
Leff, Jonah (2009). “Pastoralists at War: Violence and Security in the Kenya–
Sudan–Uganda Border Region”. International Journal of Conflict and Violence 3(2),
188–203.
Lidow, N. (2010). “Rebel Governance and Civilian Abuse: Comparing Liberia’s
Rebels Using Satellite Data”, presented at the annual meeting of the American
Political Science Association, Washington, DC, 2–5 September 2010. Available
at: http://cega.berkeley.edu/assets/miscellaneous_files/wgape/19_Lidow.pdf,
accessed 18 January 2013.
Lotze, W. and Kasumba, Y. (2012). “AMISOM and the Protection of Civilians in
Somalia”. Conflict Trends, No. 2, 17–24.
NATO (2011). “Press Briefing on Libya”. www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/opin­
ions_78535.htm, accessed 18 January 2013.
New York Times (2012). “NATO sees Flaws in Air Campaign against Qaddafi”, 14
April 2012. www.nytimes.com/2012/04/15/world/africa/nato- sees-flaws- in-air-
campaign-against- qaddafi.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0, accessed 18 January 2013.
Pape, Robert (2012). “When Duty Calls: A Pragmatic Standard of Humanitarian
Intervention”. International Security 37(1), 41–80.
PKSOI (2013). Protection of Civilians Military Reference Guide Carlisle, Pa: Peacekeep­
ing and Stability Operations Institute (PKSOI).
Sewall, Sarah, Raymond, Dwight and Chin, Sally (2010). MARO: Mass Atrocity
Response Operations: A Military Planning Handbook. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard
Kennedy School, Carr Center for Human Rights Policy.
Silber, L. and Little, Alan (1997). Yugoslavia: Death of a Nation. London: Penguin
Books.
--- Page 58 ---
214 A. W. Beadle
Smith, R. (2006). The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World. London:
Penguin Books.
TIME (2012). “Iron Dome: A Missile Shield That Works”, 19 November. http://
nation.time.com/2012/11/19/iron- dome-a- missile-shield- that-works/, accessed
18 January 2013.
UN (2012). “Press Conference by Peacekeeping Force Commanders”, 20 June.
www.un.org/News/briefings/docs/2012/120620_DPKO.doc.htm, accessed 18
January 2013.
UN Joint Human Rights Office (UNJHRO) (2009). “Summary of Fact Finding Mis­
sions on Alleged Human Rights Violations Committed by the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) in the Districts of Haut- Uélé and Bas- Uélé in Orientale Province of
the Democratic Republic of Congo”. Special Report by the United Nations Organiza­
tion Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), December 2009.
UNAMA (2009). Afghanistan: Annual Report 2008. http://unama.unmissions.org/
Portals/UNAMA/human%20rights/UNAMA_09february-Annual%20Report_
PoC%202008_FINAL_11Feb09.pdf
UNAMA (2012). Afghanistan: Annual Report 2011. http://unama.unmissions.org/
Portals/UNAMA/Documents/UNAMA%20POC%202011%20Report_Final_
Feb%202012.pdf, accessed 18 January 2013.
UNAMA (2014). Afghanistan: Annual Report 2013. http://unama.unmissions.org/
Portals/UNAMA/human%20rights/Feb_8_2014_PoC- report_2013-Full- report­
ENG.pdf, accessed 21 March 2014.
Vick, Alan J., Moore, Richard M., Pirnie, Bruce R. and Stillion, John (2001). Aero­
space Operations Against Elusive Targets. MR- 1398 (RAND Corporation). Available
at www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_reports/MR1398.html.
Weiss, Thomas (2010). “Halting atrocities in Kenya”. Great Decisions 2010. http://
kofiannanfoundation.org/sites/default/files/Kenya%20FPA%20Weiss.pdf,
accessed 18 January 2013.
Wheeler, Nicholas J. (2000). Saving Strangers: Humanitarian Intervention in Inter­
national Society Oxford: Oxford University Press.
--- Page 59 ---
230 T. Nyhamar and P. M. Norheim-Martinsen
References
Clausewitz, Carl Von (1832) [1984]. On War. Edited and translated by Michael
Howard and Peter Paret. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Howard, Michael (1979). “The Forgotten Dimensions of Strategy”. Foreign Affairs
57(5), 975–986.
Huntington, Samuel P. (1957). The Soldier and the State: The Theory and Politics of
Civil–Military Relations. Cambridge: Belknap.
Janowitz, Morris (1960). The Professional Soldier: A Social and Political Portrait. New
York: Free Press of Glencoe.
Ricks, Thomas E. (2009). The Gamble: General David Petraeus and the American
Military Adventure in Iraq. New York: Penguin Press.
Robinson, Linda 2008. Tell Me How this Ends: General David Petraeus and the Search
for a Way out of Iraq: New York: PublicAffairs.
Schadlow, Nadia and Richard A. Laquement (2009). “Winning Wars, Not Just Battles:
Expanding the Military Profession to Incorporate Stability Operations”. In
Suzanne C. Nielsen and Don M. Snider, Eds. American Civil–Military Relations: The
Soldier and the State in a New Era. Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Smith, Rupert (2007). The Utility of Force: The Art of War in the Modern World. New
York: Knopf.
Strachan, Hew (2006). “Making Strategy: Civil–Military Relations after Iraq”. Sur­
vival 48, 59–82.
Ucko, David H. and Robert Egnell (2013). Counterinsurgency in Crisis: Britain and
the Challenges of Modern Warfare. New York: Columbia University Press.
