.'X" 


S  ^T^          ^ 

UN  Tzu 


ON    THE 


ART    OF    WA.R 


THE  OLDEST  MILITARY  TREATISE  IN  THE  WORLD 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  CHINESE  WITH  INTRODUCTION 
AND  CRITICAL  NOTES 


BY 


LIONEL  GILES,  M.  A. 

Assistant  in  the  Department  of  Oriental  Printed  Books  &  MSS. 
in  the  British  Museum. 


LONDON 

LUZAC    &   C°. 
1910 


u 

101 


WO 


$7119? 


PRINTED   BY   E.  J.   BBILL,   LEYDEN   (Holland). 


mp  fcrotger 


In  tfie  jjopc  tgat 

a  toorfe  2400  pearg  old 

map  pet  contain  fc£$ong  iuottg  con^fdetation 

bp  tge  ^olbiet  of  to^Dap 

tgi^  translation 
i^  affectionateH'p  Uebicated 


\ 


CONTENTS 


Page 

PREFACE vii 

INTRODUCTION 

Sun  Wu  and  his  Book xi 

The  Text  of  Sun  Tzu xxx 

The  Commentators xxxiv 

Appreciations  of  Sun  Tzu xlii 

Apologies  for  war xliii 

Bibliography 1 

Chap.       I.  Laying  Plans i 

II.  Waging  War 9 

„       III.  Attack  by  Stratagem 17 

„        IV.  Tactical  Dispositions 26 

„         V.  Energy 33 

„        VI._Weak  Points  and  Strong 42 

„      VIL  Manoeuvring 55 

„     VIII.  Variation  of  Tactics 71 

IX,-Xhe  Army  on  the  March 80 

Terrain 100 

The  Nine  Situations 114 

The  Attack  by  Fire 150 

„"  XIII.  The  Use  of  Spies .  160 

CHINESE  CONCORDANCE 176 

INDEX 192 


PREFACE 


The  seventh  volume  of  "Memoires  concernant  1'histoire, 
les  sciences,  les  arts,  les  mceurs,  les  usages,  &c.,  des 
Chinois"1  is  devoted  to  the  Art  of  War,  and  contains, 
amongst  other  treatises,  "Les  Treize  Articles  de  Sun-tse, " 
translated  from  the  Chinese  by  a  Jesuit  Father,  Joseph 
Amiot.  Pere  Amiot  appears  to  have  enjoyed  no  small 
reputation  as  a  sinologue  in  his  day,  and  the  field  of  his 
labours  was  certainly  extensive.  But  his  so-called  trans- 
lation of  Sun  Tzu,  if  placed  side  by  side  with  the  original, 
is  seen  at  once  to  be  little  better  than  an  imposture.  It 
contains  a  great  deal  that  Sun  Tzu  did  not  write,  and 
very  little  indeed  of  what  he  did.  Here  is  a  fair  speci- 
men, taken  from  the  opening  sentences  of  chapter  5  :  — 

De  Vhabilete  dans  le  gouvernement  des  Troupes.  Sun-tse  dit :  Ayez  les 
noms  de  tous  les  Officiers  tant  generaux  que  subalternes;  inscrivez-les 
dans  un  catalogue  a  part,  avec  la  note  des  talents  &  de  la  capacite  de 
chacun  d'eux,  afin  de  pouvoir  les  employer  avec  avantage  lorsque  1'oc- 
casion  en  sera  venue.  Faites  en  sorte  que  tous  ceux  que  vous  devez 
commander  soient  persuades  que  votre  principale  attention  est  de  les 
preserver  de  tout  dommage.  Les  troupes  que  vous  ferez  avancer  centre 
1'ennemi  doivent  etre  comme  des  pierres  que  vous  lanceriez  centre  des 
oeufs.  De  vous  a  1'ennemi  il  ne  doit  y  avoir  d'autre  difference  que  celle 
du  fort  au  foible,  du  vuide  au  plein.  Attaquez  a  decouvert,  mais  soyez 
vainqueur  en  secret.  Voila  en  peu  de  mots  en  quoi  consiste  1'habilete  & 
toute  la  perfection  meme  du  gouvernement  des  troupes. 

Throughout  the  nineteenth  century,  which  saw  a  wonder- 
ful development  in  the  study  of  Chinese  literature,  no 
translator  ventured  to  tackle  Sun  Tzu,  although  his  work 
was  known  to  be  highly  valued  in  China  as  by  far  the 

1  Published  at  Paris  in  1782. 


vm  PREFACE 

oldest  and  best  compendium  of  military  science.  It  wa; 
not  until  the  year  1905  that  the  first  English  translation 
by  Capt.  E.  F.  Calthrop,  R.F.A.,  appeared  at  Tokyo 
under  the  title  "Sonshi"  (the  Japanese  form  of  Sun  Tzu). 
Unfortunately,  it  was  evident  that  the  translator's  know 
ledge  of  Chinese  was  far  too  scanty  to  fit  him  to  grappl( 
with  the  manifold  difficulties  of  Sun  Tzu.  He  himsel 
plainly  acknowledges  that  without  the  aid  of  two  Japanes< 
gentlemen  "the  accompanying  translation  would  have  beer 
impossible."  We  can  only  wonder,  then,  that  with  thei 
help  it  should  have  been  so  excessively  bad.  It  is  no 
merely  a  question  of  downright  blunders,  from  which  non< 
can  hope  to  be  wholly  exempt.  Omissions  were  frequent 
hard  passages  were  wilfully  distorted  or  slurred  over.  Sucl 
offences  are  less  pardonable.  They  would  not  be  tolerate( 
in  any  edition  of  a  Greek  or  Latin  classic,  and  a  simila 
standard  of  honesty  ought  to  be  insisted  upon  in  trans 
lations  from  Chinese. 

From  blemishes  of  this  nature,  at  least,  I  believe  tha 
the  present  translation  is  free.  It  was  not  undertake! 
out  of  any  inflated  estimate  of  my  own  powers;  but 
could  not  help  feeling  that  Sun  Tzu  deserved  a  bette 
fate  than  had  befallen  him,  and  I  knew  that,  at  any  rate 
I  could  hardly  fail  to  improve  on  the  work  of  my  predeces 
sors.  Towards  the  end  of  1908,  a  new  and  revised  editioi 
of  Capt.  Calthrop's  translation  was  published  in  London 
this  time,  however,  without  any  allusion  to  his  Japanes 
collaborators.  My  first  three  chapters  were  then  alread; 
in  the  printer's  hands,  so  that  the  criticisms  of  Capl 
Calthrop  therein  contained  must  be  understood  as  refer 
ring  to  his  earlier  edition.  In  the  subsequent  chapters 
have  of  course  transferred  my  attention  to  the  secon> 
edition.  This  is  on  the  whole  an  improvement  on  th 
other,  though  there  still  remains  much  that  cannot  pas 


1   A  rather  distressing  Japanese  flavour  pervades  the  work  throughout.    Thus,  Kir 
Ho  Lu  masquerades  as  "Katsuryo,"  Wu  and  Yu'eh  become  "Go"  and  "Etsu,"  etc.  etc, 


PREFACE  IX 

muster.  Some  of  the  grosser  blunders  have  been  rectified 
and  lacunae  filled  up,  but  on  the  other  hand  a  certain 
number  of  new  mistakes  appear.  The  very  first  sentence 
of  the  introduction  is  startlingly  inaccurate;  and  later  on, 
while  mention  is  made  of  "an  army  of  Japanese  com- 
mentators" on  Sun  Tzu  (who  are  these,  by  the  way?),  not 
a  word  is  vouchsafed  about  the  Chinese  commentators, 
who  nevertheless,  I  venture  to  assert,  form  a  much  more 
numerous  and  infinitely  more  important  "army." 

A  few  special  features  of  the  present  volume  may  now 
be  noticed.  In  the  first  place,  the  text  has  been  cut  up 
into  numbered  paragraphs,  both  in  order  to  facilitate  cross- 
reference  and  for  the  convenience  of  students  generally. 
The  division  follows  broadly  that  of  Sun  Hsing-yen's  edition  ; 
but  I  have  sometimes  found  it  desirable  to  join  two  or 
more  of  his  paragraphs  into  one.  In  quoting  from  other 
works,  Chinese  writers  seldom  give  more  than  the  bare 
title  by  way  of  reference,  and  the  task  of  research  is  apt 
to  be  seriously  hampered  in  consequence.  With  a  view 
to  obviating  this  difficulty  so  far  as  Sun  Tzu  is  concerned, 
I  have  also  appended  a  complete  concordance  of  Chinese 
characters,  following  in  this  the  admirable  example  of 
Legge,  though  an  alphabetical  arrangement  has  been 
preferred  to  the  distribution  under  radicals  which  he 
adopted.  Another  feature  borrowed  from  "The  Chinese 
Classics"  is  the  printing  of  text,  translation  and  notes  on 
the  same  page ;  the  notes,  however,  are  inserted,  according 
to  the  Chinese  method,  immediately  after  the  passages  to 
which  they  refer.  From  the  mass  of  native  commentary 
my  aim  has  been  to  extract  the  cream  only,  adding  the 
Chinese  text  here  and  there  when  it  seemed  to  present 
points  of  literary  interest.  Though  constituting  in  itself 
an  important  branch  of  Chinese  literature,  very  little  com- 
mentary of  this  kind  has  hitherto  been  made  directly  acces- 
sible by  translation. l 

1  A  notable  exception  is  to  be  found  in  Biot's  edition  of  the   Chou  Li. 


X  PREFACE 

I  may  say  in  conclusion  that,  owing  to  the  printing  off 
of  my  sheets  as  they  were  completed,  the  work  has  not 
had  the  benefit  of  a  final  revision.  On  a  review  of  the 
whole,  without  modifying  the  substance  of  my  criticisms, 
I  might  have  been  inclined  in  a  few  instances  to  temper 
their  asperity.  Having  chosen  to  wield  a  bludgeon,  how- 
ever, I  shall  not  cry  out  if  in  return  I  am  visited  with 
more  than  a  rap  over  the  knuckles.  Indeed,  I  have  been 
at  some  pains  to  put  a  sword  into  the  hands  of  future 
opponents  by  scrupulously  giving  either  text  or  reference 
for  every  passage  translated.  A  scathing  review,  even  from 
the  pen  of  the  Shanghai  critic  who  despises  "mere  trans- 
lations," would  not,  I  must  confess,  be  altogether  unwel- 
come. For,  after  all,  the  worst  fate  I  shall  have  to  dread 
is  that  which  befel  the  ingenious  paradoxes  of  George  in 
The  Vicar  of  Wakefield. 


INTRODUCTION 


SUN  Wu  AND  HIS  BOOK. 

Ssu-ma    Ch'ien    gives    the    following   biography    of  Sun 
Tzu:1-  * 


Sun  Tzu  Wu  was  a  native  of  the  Cn'i  State.  His  Art 
of  War  brought  him  to  the  notice  of  f|fj  IS  Ho  Lu, 2  King  of  1^ 
Wu.  Ho  Lu  said  to  him:  I  have  carefully  perused  your  13  chapters. 
May  I  submit  your  theory  of  managing  soldiers  to  a  slight  test?  —  Sun 
Tzu  replied:  You  may.  —  Ho  Lu  asked:  May  the  test  be  applied  to 
women?  —  The  answer  was  again  in  the  affirmative,  so  arrangements 
were  made  to  bring  180  ladies  out  of  the  Palace.  Sun  Tzu  divided  them 
into  two  companies,  and  placed  one  of  the  King's  favourite  concub…